Fees and registration | Credit Research Centre
This site uses cookies
We use necessary cookies to make our sites work. We'd also like to set additional cookies to analyse how our sites are performing, to improve the relevance of our ads and to optimise your experience. These will be set only if you accept. To learn more, view our privacy policy.
Accept all
Reject all
Manage preferences
Privacy Preferences
Necessary cookies
Necessary cookies
These cookies are necessary for the website to function normally and cannot be turned off. They are usually set in response to actions made by you which amount to a request for services, such as setting your privacy preferences, logging in or filling in forms. You can block or delete them in your browser settings, but this may affect how the website functions.
Analytics cookies
Analytics cookies
These cookies allow us to monitor how our websites and services are performing by collecting data about how visitors interact with our sites. The data is collected in a way that does not directly identify anyone.
Marketing cookies
Marketing cookies
These cookies are set through our site by our advertising partners. They may be used by those companies to build a profile of your interests and show you relevant ads on other sites. If you disable this setting, you will experience less targeted advertising.
Functionality cookies
Functionality cookies
These cookies enable us to provide enhanced functionality and personalisation. They may be set by us or by third party providers whose services we have added to our pages.
Save and close
Skip to main content
Main navigation
Home
Past Conferences
Papers 2005-2025
Conference highlights
Call for Chapters
Research
Seminars
Publications and Projects
Working Papers
PhD Topics
Visiting Scholars
Consultancy
Thought Leadership
News
Study
MSc BIRA
Executive Education
About
Background
Members
Research Advisory Board
External Affiliates
Work With Us
Search
Breadcrumb
Home
Fees and registration
Fees and registration
Benefits of attending
Over the course of this programme, you will hear from some of the world’s most experienced practitioners and academics, meet and network with colleagues from across the industry, and develop your understanding of credit. Most importantly, the conference is a chance for you to test, shape, and share your ideas, away from the day-to-day challenges of meetings, emails, and ‘to do’ lists.
You will have the opportunity participate in:
Plenary sessions: hear from keynote speakers and have the opportunity to ask questions.
Presentations: hear speakers from credit scoring consultancies, banks and other financial institutions, and universities, with the opportunity to comment and ask questions.
Networking: informal and formal opportunities to get to know fellow participants and expand your professional network.
Conference fee
In addition to the presentation programme, the conference fee will include keynote speeches, free pre-conference workshops, delegate networking opportunities, and opportunities to meet with exhibitors, a welcome reception and a conference dinner.
The conference fee includes attendance of workshops in the evening of Tuesday 26 August 2025, starting from 5pm, topics to be announced.
Complimentary and discounted registration
In line with our commitment to inclusivity and diversity, the University of Edinburgh Business School is offering a select number of complimentary and discounted delegate spaces at the Credit Scoring and Credit Control conference to individuals from countries designated as developing by the OECD.
We encourage potential delegates from countries listed on the UK government's website under OECD's developing countries to apply. These allocated spaces are limited and aimed at enabling meaningful engagement and diverse dialogues in the crucial areas of credit management and financial decision-making.
Interested individuals are encouraged to apply no later than Thursday 1 May 2025 by emailing credit.research.centre@ed.ac.uk the following:
Your name and contact details;
Tell us (in as much detail as you are comfortable with) how you fit the criteria (max 200 words);
How would attending this event help with your career goals? (max 200 words);
Are there any topics you are particularly interested in? (max 200 words);
Please detail any experience that you have of credit scoring and credit control (e.g. area of study, work experience).
Fees (per person)
Ticket type
Early bird (24 February 2025 to 5 June 2025)
Standard (6 June 2025 to 12 August 2025)
Industry
£1,100
£1,200
Industry (booking 5+ delegates)
£1,045
£1,100
Academic*
£500
£500
PhD student**
£400
£400
*In a full-time academic post at the time of the conference
**Currently studying for a PhD at the time of the conference
Fees include access to conference sessions, refreshments, lunches, receptions, and gala dinner. Delegate rates are VAT exclusive.
Register now
Visa requirements
Depending on where you are travelling from, there are a few simple rules for travelling to Scotland. Information is available on regulations concerning the length of your stay, how much money you can bring and what products you can take in and out of the country. Application forms, information on how to apply for a visa, as well as guidance for visitors coming to the UK is available on the official UK Government website.
View official guidance on entering the UK
By April 2025, all visitors who do not need a visa will need an electronic travel authorisation (ETA) to travel to the UK.
Apply for an electronic travel authorisation (ETA)
Programme changes
It may be necessary for reasons beyond our control to change the content and timing of the programme, the speakers, the date or the venue at any time prior to the event date.
Event conduct
The organisers are committed to providing a productive, welcoming and safe environment for discussion and all participants are expected to behave in a professional manner. Anyone who, in the reasonable opinion of the organisers, fails to behave professionally towards speakers, staff and other delegates will be asked to leave the Conference and no refund will be given.
Payment information
All registration fees must be paid in full before the start of the conference. Any outstanding registration fees must be paid before any joining instructions containing information on how to access the event are sent out.
Cancellations
If we have to cancel the event, our liability is limited to a full refund of the Conference fee only. Please note that we will not refund any travel or hotel costs associated with the cancellation of an event.
If you need to cancel your booking:
All cancellations must be made in writing and sent to crc.conference@ed.ac.uk.
The charge for cancelling your booking is:
Cancellation more than 28 days before the Conference – Conference fee fully refunded.
Cancellation 14 days – 28 days before the Conference – 50% of Conference fee refunded.
Less than 14 days before the Conference - no refund.
The organisers may, in their discretion, permit transfer of your place to another individual. Requests to transfer must be emailed to crc.conference@ed.ac.uk at least 48 hours in advance of the Conference start.
Footer
Contact
Credit Research Centre
University of Edinburgh Business School
29 Buccleuch Place
Edinburgh, EH8 9JS
credit.research.centre@ed.ac.uk
Connect with Us
LinkedIn
Business School
Terms & Conditions
Freedom of Information
Privacy & Cookies
Website Accessibility
