Scorecarding with Naïve Bayes
Report this article
Denis Burakov
Denis Burakov
Published Feb 20, 2024
+ Follow
In the consumer lending domain, credit scorecards serve as the fundamental pillars for decision-making processes in determining who qualifies for a loan. Lenders rely on these scorecards as benchmarks, collecting evidence of a customer's creditworthiness. Traditionally, credit scorecards are constructed through well-established methods, namely Logistic Regression and a combination of Weight of Evidence (WOE) + Logistic Regression. This text explores an alternative approach: a non-parametric method employing WOE as a Naïve Bayes estimator to build a logarithmic scoring system, providing an alternative and simpler methodology for credit risk modeling. 🚀
Common Ways to Build Credit Scorecards
There are two commonly accepted ways to build credit scorecards for decision-making in the lending industry.
1️⃣ Logistic Regression
When we build credit scorecards using logistic regression, we first standardize input variables to some desired range (e.g., using z-scores) and convert resulting values to credit scores using a technique like Points to Double Odds (PDO).
2️⃣ Weight of Evidence (WOE) + Logistic Regression
With this “semi-Naïve” approach, we create distinct risk groups for each input feature and calculate WOE scores. As a next step, we fit a logistic regression to "fine-tune" and dampen the weights of features. Finally, we can derive credit scores from WOE-transformed features and logistic regression weights, for example, using the PDO method.
Yet, building scorecards using WOE without logistic regression is not so common due to an excessive focus of practitioners on the importance of logistic regression in this process. This text aims to show an alternative way how to build credit scorecards with a non-parametric approach in mind: leveraging WOE as a Naïve Bayesian estimator💡.
WOE-Naïve Bayes Scorecard Ingredients
The following diagram describes the modeling approach to building a scorecard with the Naïve Bayes approach:
To understand the modeling workflow we need to introduce some definitions.
➡️ Binning: Binning is the process of grouping or discretizing numerical data into intervals or "bins." For example, numerical features can be divided into bins with an equal number of points or using a clustering technique like k-means.
➡️ Target encoding: Target encoding involves calculating the average value of the target variable (default or bad rate in the credit scoring case) for a given bin or group.
➡️ Log-odds: Log-odds (used interchangeably with "logit" or "logits") represent the natural logarithm of the odds of belonging to class 1 (default) or class 0 (no default), odds are p / (1-p).
➡️ Weight of Evidence (WOE): WOE in the Naïve Bayes scorecarding process can be seen as a "distance" in log-odds between a particular risk group's log-odds of default and the average log-odds of the entire sample.
Weight of Evidence formula
The Origins of WOE Theory
The Weight of Evidence (WOE) concept, which found its wide application in credit scoring, has its roots in the 19th century England. For example, C.S. Peirce, a well-known thinker, used the term to talk about how strong the evidence supports a hypothesis, also introducing the term log-odds. Jumping to the 20th century, Irving John Good, who was the main statistical assistant to Alan Turing, among his other contributions to the field of Bayesian analysis and statistics, developed the theory of Weight of Evidence for hypothesis testing.
In his brief survey on Weight of Evidence published in 1985, Good provided an extensive overview of the concept. Most notably, he wrote:
"The final probability of H, should depend only on the weight of evidence and on the initial probability, say
P(H ∣ E) = g[W(H:E), P(H)]
If H and ¬H are simple statistical hypotheses, and if E is one of the possible experimental outcomes occurring in the definitions of H and ¬H, then P(E ∣ H) / P(E ∣¬H) is a simple likelihood ratio, but this is a very special case. In general, this ratio is regarded as meaningful only to a Bayesian. It could be called a ratio of Bayesian likelihoods."
He provides the formula for WOE (left-hand side), which is more commonly represented in modern terms on the right-hand side
Further in his summary, Good provides the formula for the Bayes Factor (likelihood ratio), which he also refers to as the Bayes-Jeffreys-Turing factor, summarizing its contributors:
Bayes factor
"The right side of equation can be described in words as the ratio of the final odds of H to its initial odds, or the ratio of the posterior to the prior odds, or the factor by which the initial odds of H are multiplied to give the final odds.
In current Bayesian literature it is usually called the Bayes factor in favour of H provided by E. Thus weight of evidence is equal to the logarithm of the Bayes factor."
Going back to the WOE definition described in the beginning of this text we can see that:
Because of the independence conditions ("naïve"), factors are multiplicative and weights of evidence (WOE) are additive.
When comparing this WOE calculation to the traditional credit risk definition, one may observe that the signs are "flipped." This is because in credit risk we normally define the same entity using the log-odds of goods (class 0) to bads (class 1), known as the good-to-bad ratio. The sign may be more intuitive that a negative score drives the credit score down.
How It Works
We can visualize the process step-by-step on a small data subset with 10 samples (the model is pre-trained on the full sample).
Step 1: Raw features ⬇️
Step 2: Binning ⬇️
Step 3: Target encoding ⬇️
Step 4: Target encoding to log-odds ⬇️
Step 5: Average default rate ⬇️
Recommended by LinkedIn
AI Bank Statement Analyzer: How Transaction-Level…
Novel Patterns
3 months ago
Why and How to Evaluate the Creditworthiness of SMEs'…
Hemanth Kumar
7 years ago
Revolutionising Indian NBFC Sector: Data Science
Nihal Ramteke
1 year ago
Step 6: Log-odds of average default rate ⬇️
Step 7: Calculating WOE scores (4-6) ⬇️
In this step we subtract the constant of sample log-odds (-2.1972) from Step 6 from each target-encoded log-odds value from Step 4.
Step 8: Inference: calculating a sum of WOE scores ⬇️
Step 9: Inference: adding bias ⬇️
In this step we add the bias (sample log-odds) from Step 6 to the prediction column from Step 8 to get the final prediction (other columns not affected).
Step 10: Obtaining a probability of default (PD) ⬇️
We can convert the final log-odds score to a probability using sigmoid.
Step 11: Calculating credit scores from WOE scores ⬇️
We convert WOE scores to credit scores by using the PDO method.
In this process, we define PDO, target score, and target odds parameters to calculate the factor and offset parameters. Each factor i has an equal weight (since we are adding evidences), and bias is the sample log-odds.
The following parameters were used for the transformation of WOE scores into credit scores: PDO = 30, Target Score = 500, and Odds = 20.
Step 12: Calculating the final credit score ⬇️
The final score is the sum of individual scores across 6 features.
Below we can visualize the distribution of credit scores on the hold-out set of data points, which were not used in estimating the model:
To test the performance of the WOE Naïve Bayes model, we can benchmark the discriminatory power and calibration accuracy of WOE Naïve Bayes score against logistic regression.
Both discrimination and calibration metrics indicate that the WOE Naïve Bayes model surpasses its linear challenger, boasting better Gini and Brier scores. This indicates superior performance in discriminating good and bad credit risk and achieving more accurate probability of default (PD) estimates.
The WOE-Naïve Bayes scorecard introduces a novel and simplified approach to credit risk assessment in consumer lending. It harmonizes with traditional scoring methods while offering a fresh perspective with its minimal reliance on assumptions, aside from independence (still a bold one). This approach suggests that a simpler model can effectively support credit risk assessment, maintaining clarity without compromising on insight. 🧪
Pipeline
Below is a scikit-learn pipeline implementing the WOE Naïve Bayes estimator:
import numpy as np
from sklearn.preprocessing import (
KBinsDiscretizer,
TargetEncoder,
FunctionTransformer
)
from sklearn.pipeline import make_pipeline
from scipy.special import logit
base_log_odds = np.log(np.mean(y_train) / (1 - np.mean(y_train)))
def convert_to_woe(X: np.ndarray):
eps = 1e-8
X = logit(X + eps)
X = X - base_log_odds
if X.ndim == 1:
X = X.reshape(-1, 1)
return X
woe_pipeline.fit = make_pipeline(
KBinsDiscretizer(n_bins=10, encode="ordinal", strategy="kmeans"),
TargetEncoder(smooth=0.0001, cv=2),
FunctionTransformer(convert_to_woe, validate=False)
)
woe_pipeline.fit(X_train, y_train)
Credit score
This code snippet below illustrates how to create credit scores from the WOE Naïve Bayes estimator:
import numpy as np
pdo = 30.0
TargetScore = 500
Odds = 20.0
factor = pdo / np.log(2)
offset = TargetScore - (factor * np.log(Odds))
bias_ind = base_log_odds / 6
woe_df['score'] = np.sum(-(woe_df + bias_ind) * factor + (offset / 6), axis=1)
--
I hope you have enjoyed reading this post! 💡
I would like to thank
Joachim Nsofini, PhD
,
Guillermo Navas Palencia, PhD
, and
Paul Edwards
for their valuable feedback.
All views expressed are my own.
Explore more on #CreditRiskModeling, #Lending, and #ModelRiskManagement, and stay updated by subscribing here: https://linktr.ee/deburky 🔔
Like
Like
Celebrate
Support
Love
Insightful
Funny
Comment
Copy
LinkedIn
Facebook
X
Share
117
5 Comments
René Naarmann
2y
Report this comment
Mikael Ling maybe of interest?!
Like
Reply
1 Reaction
ANKIT JAIN,CQF,EPAT
2y
Report this comment
Hey Denis. Thanks for explaining how Naive Bayes' can be used with WOE value.
Could you please tell me why we introduced BIAS in our calculation. What's the logic?
Like
Reply
1 Reaction
2 Reactions
Roman Matyash
2y
Report this comment
Fascinating insights into leveraging Naïve Bayes for credit scorecard construction! 🌟
Like
Reply
1 Reaction
2 Reactions
Denis Burakov
2y
Report this comment
For those interested in the technicalities between the classical and Good's Bayesian formulas for Weight of Evidence (WOE), I invite you to explore this worked-through example ⬇️
https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/14BabLDtJL917JF7bIZXXFwOcVynEKBX_NzRDoPqTv70/edit?usp=sharing
Like
Reply
3 Reactions
4 Reactions
See more comments
To view or add a comment, sign in
More articles by Denis Burakov
System Thinkers Will Define the New Economy
Apr 7, 2026
System Thinkers Will Define the New Economy
A new model drops every week. OpenClaw, MCP, MiniMax, GLM-5, agents, orchestration frameworks.
50
2 Comments
Navigating the New Wave of Data Science
Mar 31, 2026
Navigating the New Wave of Data Science
In 2019, data science was all the rage: the premise of big data unlocking business insights presented new opportunities…
114
7 Comments
Designing AI Underwriters
Mar 25, 2025
Designing AI Underwriters
The integration of AI into modern loan underwriting is set to reshape how institutions approach credit decisioning. As…
34
6 Comments
Validating Tree-Based Risk Models
Jun 12, 2024
Validating Tree-Based Risk Models
Boosting is a fundamental concept in machine learning that has achieved remarkable success in binary classification…
125
9 Comments
Balancing Risk and Profit
Oct 17, 2023
Balancing Risk and Profit
Understanding profit independently of risk is increasingly vital for lenders to create monetary value through proper…
89
7 Comments
Building Random Forest Scorecards
Sep 20, 2023
Building Random Forest Scorecards
In the lending industry and credit risk research, a risk practitioner can often encounter Weight-of-Evidence logistic…
87
6 Comments
Benchmarking PD Models
Sep 5, 2023
Benchmarking PD Models
When evaluating various scoring functions for the Probability of Default (PD) modeling, the most commonly assessed…
90
7 Comments
Unlocking Lending Profitability with Risk Modeling
Aug 23, 2023
Unlocking Lending Profitability with Risk Modeling
In earlier times, access to banking services required direct in-person communication with a bank officer. The outcomes…
43
Understanding LGD Risk
Jul 17, 2023
Understanding LGD Risk
The Loss Given Default (LGD) is a credit risk parameter that plays an important role in contemporary banking risk…
225
18 Comments
Leveraging Profit Scoring in Digital Loan Underwriting
Jun 28, 2023
Leveraging Profit Scoring in Digital Loan Underwriting
Traditional loan approval process relies heavily on consumers’ credit bureau scores, debt-to-income (DTI) ratios, and…
24
Show more
See all articles
