Exploring Interpretable Scorecard Boosting
Report this article
Denis Burakov
Denis Burakov
Published May 23, 2023
+ Follow
Credit scorecards provide lenders with a standardized and objective method to assess credit risk and make informed, automated lending decisions. They play a crucial role in streamlining the lending strategy, minimizing the potential for human bias, and enabling effective risk management.
One of the key methods utilized in scorecard development is the Weight-of-Evidence Logistic Regression (WOE LR) model design. These "glass-box" models have been in use for decades and are known for their ease of interpretation. What is often overlooked, they have demonstrated reliability in production and can be deployed using SQL alone.
However, a limitation of these models is their inability to describe the risk attributes of different segments and products within a single scorecard due to their relative simplicity. Beyond that, the use of numerous scorecards has several drawbacks. Processes such as beta tuning and retraining, validation, versioning, deployment, and maintenance require significant manual effort and subject matter expertise.
In this post, building upon previous work by Scotiabank's ML team, I will follow their proposed credit risk modeling technique based on scorecard boosting. This version of good-bad analysis can enhance scorecard performance without compromising model interpretability, which is crucial for explaining credit decisions to model users, customers, and regulators alike.
Scorecard boosting
Credit scoring is a high-stakes field where accuracy and interpretability are crucial for real-world usability. As a result, many complex "black-box" algorithms have not gained widespread adoption in lending. An excellent example highlighting this is the outcome of the FICO Explainable Machine Learning Challenge, where Duke University's Team emerged as winners by building a fully transparent "glass-box" risk model. Their model not only outperformed more complex alternatives in terms of interpretability but also exhibited superior predictive power.
The need for reliable scoring models is also highlighted by regulation and model risk management best practices. A corollary of this requirement is what is known as "accuracy-explainability" trade-off: it may not be feasible to increase one dimension without decreasing the other.
In his lecture Machine Learning for Retail Credit Risk for NVIDIA, Paul Edwards presented a well-known accuracy-explainability diagram that specifically addressed the intricacies of the credit risk use-case:
Adapted from "Machine Learning in Retail Credit Risk: Algorithms, Infrastructure, and Alternative Data — Past, Present, and Future" - NVIDIA
As a challenger approach to WOE LR, Scotiabank's ML team proposed a boosting technique for credit scorecard development. Such models, as was demonstrated in the presentation, have the same positive properties of a linear model, yet are based on a more advanced tree-based estimation which yields substantial gains in scoring accuracy.
In the next sections, we will explore how a prototype of a boosted scorecard can be built based on FICO-xML-Challenge dataset.
How does it work?
A boosted scorecard can be described as an ensemble of decision trees that are trained iteratively using the gradient boosting algorithm. In the context of credit decisioning, specific constraints such as monotonicity (to control for the relationship with the default rate) and interaction (to eliminate potential feature interactions) are often applied.
Since we're working with a binary target variable, the predictions in leafs generated by each consecutive tree can be interpreted as log odds. Consequently, they can be converted into scorecard points, similar to the WOE LR approach as Weights and Biases' notebook and model card have shown.
To demonstrate the application of boosted scorecards, we fit a model using a pre-defined set of features with monotonic trends from the OptBinning library's example. Our simple boosted scorecard with a maximum tree depth of 1 consists of 45 individual trees. Below we can see the first five trees:
Boosted scorecard: first 5 levels
It can be seen from the table above that customers with a credit bureau score less than 74 are assigned 0 points, while those above 74 receive 24 points in the first iteration (Tree 0).
We validate our scorecard by checking against XGBoost model's first and second tree plots:
Recommended by LinkedIn
Responsible Engineering in Credit: Harnessing Idealism…
Somtoochukwu Akosa MBA
2 months ago
Credit Risk Modeling: Analyzing Financial Viability…
Probyto AI
2 years ago
How AI-Powered Financial Spreading Processed 300,000+…
Pranjal Daga
9 months ago
Boosted scorecard: first tree plot
Boosted scorecard: second tree plot
After fitting the scorecard, we can apply model predictions in scorecard points on the test data. The ultimate goal of scorecard development is to determine a cut-off point, which can be referred to as a "sweet spot," where most of the high-risk applicants are rejected while retaining the majority of low-risk applicants.
We further visualize this threshold in the following chart:
Boosted scorecard: cut-off
As expected, a higher credit score corresponds to lower risk. By setting a cut-off point of less than ~30 points for our known good-bad population, we can reject approximately 80% of bad risk.
Model interpretability
A key advantage of boosted scorecards is their global and local interpretability. Since the final score is derived from the sum of points assigned to each feature in our scorecard, feature importances are straightforward and easy to calculate.
We can visualize scorecard's custom feature importances below:
Boosted scorecard: feature importances
We can observe that external score has the highest impact on predictions following by delinquency and utilization features.
To validate our results, we can further look at a similar diagram using the SHAP global importance plot, which is a common model-agnostic method for interpreting model results:
Boosted scorecard: SHAP feature importances
As we can see from the list of top features selected by SHAP, both methods yield highly consistent results, confirming the reliability and interpretability of the boosted scorecard model.
Concluding remarks
Explainability is a crucial element in credit decisioning, as consumers have the right to understand why their applications were rejected and to question the data and methods behind the decision. While scorecards based on linear models have traditionally been considered the gold standard for standardized and reliable credit risk assessment, a more advanced technique called scorecard boosting carries potential in boosting predictive power of models without sacrificing their explainability.
--
I hope you have enjoyed reading this post! 💡
The technical appendix with the code can be found in my GitHub.
All views expressed are my own.
Like
Like
Celebrate
Support
Love
Insightful
Funny
Comment
Copy
LinkedIn
Facebook
X
Share
44
6 Comments
Dieter Kurakov
2y
Report this comment
Fatih Akdere
Like
Reply
1 Reaction
2 Reactions
Paul Edwards
2y
Report this comment
Great work! Love this
Like
Reply
1 Reaction
2 Reactions
Agostino Calamia
2y
Report this comment
Very intersting Denis! Do you know any company that applies this already?
Like
Reply
1 Reaction
2 Reactions
See more comments
To view or add a comment, sign in
More articles by Denis Burakov
System Thinkers Will Define the New Economy
Apr 7, 2026
System Thinkers Will Define the New Economy
A new model drops every week. OpenClaw, MCP, MiniMax, GLM-5, agents, orchestration frameworks.
50
2 Comments
Navigating the New Wave of Data Science
Mar 31, 2026
Navigating the New Wave of Data Science
In 2019, data science was all the rage: the premise of big data unlocking business insights presented new opportunities…
114
7 Comments
Designing AI Underwriters
Mar 25, 2025
Designing AI Underwriters
The integration of AI into modern loan underwriting is set to reshape how institutions approach credit decisioning. As…
34
6 Comments
Validating Tree-Based Risk Models
Jun 12, 2024
Validating Tree-Based Risk Models
Boosting is a fundamental concept in machine learning that has achieved remarkable success in binary classification…
125
9 Comments
Scorecarding with Naïve Bayes
Feb 20, 2024
Scorecarding with Naïve Bayes
In the consumer lending domain, credit scorecards serve as the fundamental pillars for decision-making processes in…
117
5 Comments
Balancing Risk and Profit
Oct 17, 2023
Balancing Risk and Profit
Understanding profit independently of risk is increasingly vital for lenders to create monetary value through proper…
89
7 Comments
Building Random Forest Scorecards
Sep 20, 2023
Building Random Forest Scorecards
In the lending industry and credit risk research, a risk practitioner can often encounter Weight-of-Evidence logistic…
87
6 Comments
Benchmarking PD Models
Sep 5, 2023
Benchmarking PD Models
When evaluating various scoring functions for the Probability of Default (PD) modeling, the most commonly assessed…
90
7 Comments
Unlocking Lending Profitability with Risk Modeling
Aug 23, 2023
Unlocking Lending Profitability with Risk Modeling
In earlier times, access to banking services required direct in-person communication with a bank officer. The outcomes…
43
Understanding LGD Risk
Jul 17, 2023
Understanding LGD Risk
The Loss Given Default (LGD) is a credit risk parameter that plays an important role in contemporary banking risk…
225
18 Comments
Show more
See all articles
