Benchmarking PD Models
Report this article
Denis Burakov
Denis Burakov
Published Sep 5, 2023
+ Follow
When evaluating various scoring functions for the Probability of Default (PD) modeling, the most commonly assessed performance metric is the Gini score. The Gini score measures the rank-ordering power of the model, which helps determine how effectively the model can identify default observations based on the order of its predictions. A Gini score of 1 indicates perfect discrimination ("crystal ball" performance), while a score of 0 implies no discriminatory power. However, in certain scenarios, the Gini coefficient can be a misleading metric and could lead to a selection of a less optimal model.
Imagine a situation where two scoring functions, WOE Logistic Regression (WOE LR) and XGBoost, perform similarly in terms of the Gini score (Gini = 2 * AUC - 1):
ROC AUC curve for the two scoring functions
In this scenario, a common method of model evaluation beyond the Gini coefficient is to establish a classification rule based on a probability model and assess the outcomes using a cost-benefit analysis. This analysis involves assigning fixed costs and benefits based on the costs of misclassification at a predetermined cut-off.
Cut-off setting: not recommended for Credit Risk problems
Given that this approach requires setting a specific cut-off point for classifying a prediction as being correct (e.g., 4% or 50%), it's not guaranteed that a model selected using this method would perform similarly on the new data when the underlying distribution of the target variable is different from the training dataset.
Log Loss
One metric for assessing PD model performance that is not so often discussed is a logarithmic scoring rule, more known as Log Loss:
Log Loss
Log Loss measures the proximity of predictions to the true labels and is a common loss function in model estimation methods such as Logistic Regression and Gradient Boosted Decision Trees. Additionally, this metric is employed to assess the calibration of forecasts.
Log Loss assigns more weight to predictions that are "correct". When predictions deviate significantly, for example, when the predicted probability is 0.99 for a "good" customer (default flag is 0) or 0.01 for a "bad" customer (default flag is 1), we observe large loss values, indicating lower accuracy of our predictions:
High Log Loss example
Alternatively, if the predicted probabilities are close to the true labels of default event, the loss will be close to 0 indicating high accuracy of our predictions:
Low Log Loss example
Below Loss curves for the two scoring functions with similar Gini scores are shown:
Loss curves for two models
We can observe that Loss curves for our models are quite similar, but there are differences in the lower probability range for the defaulted cases (left chart) and in the upper probability range of the non-defaulted cases (right chart) where loss values are high indicating inaccuracies. Naive loss corresponds to a forecast of a sample average default rate (50%) for each observation.
Looking at these results it is difficult to draw a conclusion whether one model is preferable over the other.
Loss Uplift
There is a way how we can compare two Loss metrics to benchmark the two models using a Loss uplift metric:
Loss Uplift
The Loss uplift metric is conceptually similar to Normalized Cross Entropy from He X. et al. 2014 paper, but here we benchmark our challenger model against a baseline model and not a "random guess" or naive prediction model (e.g., assigning 50% probability for every observation).
Essentially, Loss uplift an arithmetic average of the absolute differences between Log Loss values of the two models for each prediction. Negative values indicate better performance compared to the baseline and vice versa.
In our example, we will benchmark WOE LR (challenger) against XGBoost (baseline).
Loss uplift can be calculated for each class separately and on the overall level, the results are reported below:
Uplift goods (class = 0): -0.20%
Uplift bads (class = 1): -0.02%
Uplift: -0.10%
The metrics above show that WOE LR has a lower error and has an improved performance for both classes.
Business metric
To visualize the Loss uplift, we will create a business metric based on a cost-benefit analysis with the following logic in mind:
We assign +€100 when our challenger model predicted a higher probability for Class 1 vs the baseline and -€100 otherwise
We assign +€50 when our challenger model predicted lower probability for Class 0 vs the baseline and -€50 otherwise
This approach allows us to give a graphical representation in the form of Payout curves for the Loss uplift metric:
Payout Curves
What we observe in the chart above that most of the payout is coming from the improvements in prediction accuracy for defaulters in the probability range > 70%. Due to a higher weight (€100) used for defaulted observations, we can see that our choice in selecting WOE LR would be warranted from a business perspective.
Total payout of using the challenger vs the baseline amounts to +€20,300.
Concluding remarks
Benchmarking PD models with similar rank-ordering power based on alternative metrics can help in identifying most promising models with higher payouts of model use. Utilizing a combination of scoring rules and business metrics enables risk practitioners to look beyond Gini scores in search of the best scoring model.
--
I hope you have enjoyed reading this post! 💡
The technical appendix with the code can be found in this notebook.
All views expressed are my own.
References
He, Xinran, et al. "Practical Lessons from Predicting Clicks on Ads at Facebook." Proceedings of the Eighth International Workshop on Data Mining for Online Advertising. 2014. https://research.facebook.com/publications/practical-lessons-from-predicting-clicks-on-ads-at-facebook/
Like
Like
Celebrate
Support
Love
Insightful
Funny
Comment
Copy
LinkedIn
Facebook
X
Share
90
7 Comments
Aniruddha Neogi
2y
Report this comment
Good article! Quick question though. Shouldn’t logistic regression always come out as the winner when using the log loss metric? After all the log loss looks pretty much like the likelihood function which is minimized when estimating logistic regression coefficients. Payout curves are a good idea if pd models are looked at in isolation. When estimating expected losses dollar comparisons should ideally even out once EAD and LGD are considered.
Finally, I assume choosing a holdout or out of time sample data for benchmarking always helps.
Like
Reply
1 Reaction
2 Reactions
Philipp Gorokhov
2y
Report this comment
Denis, thank you for the article. I have a couple of questions, some insights are not clear enough:
1) What's the idea of calculation "Loss Uplift". It's just difference between LogLosses of 2 models. Suppose models have equal ROC_AUC, then compare LogLosses and find better model. I've run your python script LogLoss_woe = 54.88%, LogLoss_xgb = 54.99%, Uplift - 0.1%. Do I understand correctly your message is "necessary to rank models by 2 metrics, AUC then LogLoss"?
2) I do not understand the idea behind Business metric. Why 100EUR, 50EUR? Guess it's expert estimate, but looks inapplicable for real cases. I'd develop the approach with exploit of limits at the moment of credit approval, different penalty depending on Probability difference and so on.
3) Looks like X legend in LogLoss figures are slightly incorrect. Ordered by Probability, not Score. Isn't it?
Like
Reply
1 Reaction
Arjun Sunder S, CA,FRM
2y
Report this comment
Thank you so much for sharing this. Very insightful
Like
Reply
1 Reaction
2 Reactions
Niclas Celvin
2y
Report this comment
Thanks for sharing this, will definitely apply some of these techniques going forward.
Like
Reply
1 Reaction
2 Reactions
See more comments
To view or add a comment, sign in
More articles by Denis Burakov
System Thinkers Will Define the New Economy
Apr 7, 2026
System Thinkers Will Define the New Economy
A new model drops every week. OpenClaw, MCP, MiniMax, GLM-5, agents, orchestration frameworks.
50
2 Comments
Navigating the New Wave of Data Science
Mar 31, 2026
Navigating the New Wave of Data Science
In 2019, data science was all the rage: the premise of big data unlocking business insights presented new opportunities…
114
7 Comments
Designing AI Underwriters
Mar 25, 2025
Designing AI Underwriters
The integration of AI into modern loan underwriting is set to reshape how institutions approach credit decisioning. As…
34
6 Comments
Validating Tree-Based Risk Models
Jun 12, 2024
Validating Tree-Based Risk Models
Boosting is a fundamental concept in machine learning that has achieved remarkable success in binary classification…
125
9 Comments
Scorecarding with Naïve Bayes
Feb 20, 2024
Scorecarding with Naïve Bayes
In the consumer lending domain, credit scorecards serve as the fundamental pillars for decision-making processes in…
117
5 Comments
Balancing Risk and Profit
Oct 17, 2023
Balancing Risk and Profit
Understanding profit independently of risk is increasingly vital for lenders to create monetary value through proper…
89
7 Comments
Building Random Forest Scorecards
Sep 20, 2023
Building Random Forest Scorecards
In the lending industry and credit risk research, a risk practitioner can often encounter Weight-of-Evidence logistic…
87
6 Comments
Unlocking Lending Profitability with Risk Modeling
Aug 23, 2023
Unlocking Lending Profitability with Risk Modeling
In earlier times, access to banking services required direct in-person communication with a bank officer. The outcomes…
43
Understanding LGD Risk
Jul 17, 2023
Understanding LGD Risk
The Loss Given Default (LGD) is a credit risk parameter that plays an important role in contemporary banking risk…
225
18 Comments
Leveraging Profit Scoring in Digital Loan Underwriting
Jun 28, 2023
Leveraging Profit Scoring in Digital Loan Underwriting
Traditional loan approval process relies heavily on consumers’ credit bureau scores, debt-to-income (DTI) ratios, and…
24
Show more
See all articles
Explore content categories
Career
Productivity
Finance
Soft Skills & Emotional Intelligence
Project Management
Education
Technology
Leadership
Ecommerce
User Experience
Recruitment & HR
Customer Experience
Real Estate
Marketing
Sales
Retail & Merchandising
Science
Supply Chain Management
Future Of Work
Consulting
Writing
Economics
Artificial Intelligence
Employee Experience
Workplace Trends
Fundraising
Networking
Corporate Social Responsibility
Negotiation
Communication
Engineering
Hospitality & Tourism
Business Strategy
Change Management
Organizational Culture
Design
Innovation
Event Planning
Training & Development
Show more
Show less
LinkedIn
© 2026
About
Accessibility
User Agreement
Privacy Policy
Cookie Policy
Copyright Policy
Brand Policy
Guest Controls
Community Guidelines
العربية (Arabic)
বাংলা (Bangla)
Čeština (Czech)
Dansk (Danish)
Deutsch (German)
Ελληνικά (Greek)
English (English)
Español (Spanish)
فارسی (Persian)
Suomi (Finnish)
Français (French)
हिंदी (Hindi)
Magyar (Hungarian)
Bahasa Indonesia (Indonesian)
Italiano (Italian)
עברית (Hebrew)
日本語 (Japanese)
한국어 (Korean)
मराठी (Marathi)
Bahasa Malaysia (Malay)
Nederlands (Dutch)
Norsk (Norwegian)
ਪੰਜਾਬੀ (Punjabi)
Polski (Polish)
Português (Portuguese)
Română (Romanian)
Русский (Russian)
Svenska (Swedish)
తెలుగు (Telugu)
ภาษาไทย (Thai)
Tagalog (Tagalog)
Türkçe (Turkish)
Українська (Ukrainian)
Tiếng Việt (Vietnamese)
简体中文 (Chinese (Simplified))
正體中文 (Chinese (Traditional))
Language
