Is it correct to call logistic regression a classifier? ⇩
This question represents a focal point in #PredictiveModeling where the clash between the two cultures, as described by Leo Breiman in 2001, becomes obvious. The field of #MachineLearning arose somewhat independently of the field of #Statistics, and probabilistic modeling, the hallmark of statistics, has played a more modest role in the context of algorithmic modeling.
The binary logistic regression model was developed primarily by David Cox (1958) and Strother Walker and David Duncan (1967). Logistic regression is deeply rooted in the concept of Maximum Likelihood Estimation (MLE), which was first advanced by the godfather of modern #Statistics, Ronald A. Fisher, in the 1920s ⇨ Fisher introduced MLE as a method for estimating the parameters of statistical models that best fit the observed data.
As an early example of MLE, Fisher developed Linear Discriminant Analysis (LDA) in his 1936 paper "The Use of Multiple Measurements in Taxonomic Problems" 📑. The paper outlined a method for classifying observations into two or more classes based on a set of independent variables from the Iris dataset. Fisher's LDA did not produce probabilities, therefore by today’s terminology, Fisher’s method performed classification using MLE.
Logistic regression, emerging three decades after Fisher's groundwork, optimizes the joint likelihood of inputs and labels through a linear model using MLE. The hallmark sigmoid function compresses logit outputs into a probability range (0 to 1), facilitating logistic regression's application in diverse fields like clinical diagnostics and credit scoring to discriminate risk. Classification, as has been outlined by F. Harrell, is only a part of logistic regression’s utility, which is achieved when we threshold probabilities ◍ to convert into binary outcomes ◑.
While statisticians stress the probabilistic core of logistic regression, it can also be viewed as a technique capable of performing classification through modeling the posterior class distribution. This suggests that despite its focus on probability estimation and the subsequent optional label assignment, logistic regression shares the modeling objective for binary events seen in LDA, Naive Bayes (e.g., WOE), SVM, and other binary classification methodologies.
Slide through the corresponding deck to this post to get a deeper insight into the arguments of the two cultures and share your thoughts in the comments ⬇️
⚠ 𝐃𝐢𝐬𝐜𝐥𝐚𝐢𝐦𝐞𝐫: The work of eugenicists, which Ronald A. Fisher was a known member of, was often pervaded by prejudice against racial, ethnic and disabled groups. The online publication of this material for scholarly research purposes is not an endorsement of those views nor a promotion of eugenics in any way.
▬▬▬▬▬▬▬▬▬▬▬▬▬
Explore more on #CreditRiskModeling, #Lending, and #ModelRiskManagement, and stay updated by subscribing here: https://linktr.ee/deburky 🔔
