activity_id: 7140373482889961472
source_url: https://www.linkedin.com/posts/denisburakov_woe-estimators-for-pd-models-activity-7140373482889961472-zRus?utm_source=share&utm_medium=member_desktop
final_url: https://www.linkedin.com/posts/denisburakov_woe-estimators-for-pd-models-activity-7140373482889961472-zRus/?utm_source=share&utm_medium=member_desktop
title: (3) Post | LinkedIn
authenticated_surface: True

0 notifications total Skip to search Skip to main content Keyboard shortcuts Close jump menu new feed updates notifications Home 3 3 new network updates notifications My Network Jobs Messaging Notifications Me For Business Reactivate Premium: 50% Off Carlos Vergara Lead Data Scientist | Cloud AI Solutions Architect Bogota, D.C., Capital District EPAM Systems Achieve 4x more profile visits Reactivate Premium: 50% Off Profile viewers 297 Post impressions 403 Feed detail update Feed post Denis Burakov Denis Burakov • 1st Verified • 1st Risk Modeling | Data Science on AWS | ML Engineering Risk Modeling | Data Science on AWS | ML Engineering 2yr • 2 years ago • Visible to anyone on or off LinkedIn Weight-of-Evidence (WOE) in Credit Scoring 🎲 WOE is a beloved technique of Credit Risk Modellers. It’s simple, reliable, and very effective on structured underwriting datasets. Contrary to what many people believe is a simple logistic regression, WOE can be used in more complex ensemble models like Bagging or Boosting showing performance similar to out-of-the-box XGBoost while remaining similar to a regulatory white-box 🎐 Explore similar posts on hashtag #CreditRiskModeling, hashtag #Lending, hashtag #ModelRiskManagement, and stay updated by subscribing here: https://linktr.ee/deburky 🔔 Scroll down to comments to find links to helpful resources about WOE ⬇️ Your document has finished loading 233 50 comments 25 reposts Reactions … Like Comment Repost Send Add a comment… Open Emoji Keyboard Current selected sort order is Most relevant Most relevant Denis Burakov Author Risk Modeling | Data Science on AWS | ML Engineering 2y Link to papers about WOE 📖: Fernando Torres, L. Logistic Regression in Credit Risk: The Role of Weight of Evidence and Information Value. https://medium.com/latinxinai/logistic-regression-in-credit-risk-the-role-of-weight-of-evidence-and-information-value-9e26dd690b16 Larsen, K. Data Exploration with Weight of Evidence and Information Value in R. https://multithreaded.stitchfix.com/blog/2015/08/13/weight-of-evidence/ Oettinghaus, B. WOE, IV and Scorecards in Credit Risk Modelling. https://rpubs.com/erblast/creditrisk SAS Data Science Blog. Building credit scorecards using SAS and Python. https://blogs.sas.com/content/subconsciousmusings/2019/01/18/building-credit-scorecards-using-statistical-methods-and-business-logic/ Navas-Palencia, G. Optimal Binning: Mathematical Programming Formulation. https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2001.08025 Zeng, G. Metric Divergence Measures and Information Value in Credit Scoring. https://doi.org/10.1155/2013/848271 Sharma, D. Evidence in Favor of Weight of Evidence and Binning Transformations for Predictive Modeling. http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.1925510 Viaene S. A Case Study of Applying Boosting Naive Bayes to Claim Fraud Diagnosis. https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/1277822 …more Like 5 Reply 1 reply 1 Comment on Denis Burakov’s comment Denise Nguyen • 1st Risk Modelling & Data Analytics || Moderator || The opinions are on mine. (edited) 2y Denis Burakov such an informative post, thank you!!! Like 1 Reply Andrija Djurovic • 1st Risk Advisory 2y Thanks for sharing the post and papers. WoE encoding, along with the binning of numeric risk factors, is probably the most common approach in standard credit risk modeling today. I've noticed also a common belief among practitioners regarding WoE's superiority over other encoding methods. I find this questionable as generalization in practice depends on various factors, such as characteristics of the modeling datasets, alternative encodings, performance metrics, and the binning process. A main weakness practitioners point out with WoE (and other target-based encoders) is the potential for model overfitting, given the use of target values to transform variables. In my opinion, when developing the model, especially within the traditional modeling framework, it's worth testing different encoding methods and making the final decision based on a combination of model performance, business inputs, and operational ease. By the way, a type of encoding not that common in practice but which I find very convenient is nested dummy encoding (aka partitions). It effectively addresses the multivariate binning process combined with the business requirement of different risk profiles between adjacent bins. …more Like 5 Reply 8 replies 8 Replies on Andrija Djurovic’s comment Jakob Lavröd • 2nd Senior Quantitative Risk Analyst at Handelsbanken - Quantifying whatever risks tomorrow will bring 2y Good points Andrija Djurovic. There is a bit of a statistical "douple dipping" in that the WoE algorithm trains on data that is then getting used to train the variable link in the second step, essentially using the data twice. As you write, overfitting is a real risk if one is not careful, for example by making sure to adjust the WoE level for the statistical uncertainty (in particular a problem when you get 0 of one type of outcome in a bucket). Another problem is that one can get a strange bias effect in the model. If you reject most bad customers (as one does in credit scoring), your historical dataset on accepted customers (if you have no rejection sampling) will have a correlation between the variables, for example low income customers will have to have other good features, otherwise they would not be let in. Hence the WoE looking at income will underestimate the risk in the lower tail, since all your low income customers will tend to be the "best of the worst" …more Like 3 Reply Nikola Perović, FRM • 2nd Quantitative Analyst. (edited) 2y Hey Andrija Djurovic thanks for sharing, interesting points. Indeed, analysing different discretization approaches is useful, and comparing outcomes across several dimensions. If the developer has the time to play around, which is unlikely the case in practice. Overfitting remains a risk (as always), as the approach relies on the assumption that observed default rates reflect the data-generating process. Its out of sample performance and model stability that counts, as models strive to survive until their next (re)evelopment cycle. If you have some data on the overfitting-driven performance issues of WoE approach, that would be interesting to see. Models are just attempts at approximations of reality and as such are inherently biased. Cheers. …more Like 1 Reply Nikola Perović, FRM • 2nd Quantitative Analyst. 2y Jakob Lavröd Credit scoring is, after all, a best of worst, exercise. Try offering loans to GOOGL. Cheers. Like Reply Denis Burakov Author Risk Modeling | Data Science on AWS | ML Engineering 2y Thanks for sharing your thoughts, Andrija Djurovic. I guess when we talk about encodings we assume that WOE is always a preprocessing step. I tend see it more broadly as a credit scoring tool, a model in itself. A benefit of WOE is actually that missing data, outliers, economic relationships - all of this is accounted for. With an algorithm like OptBinning, we can then get the best splits of our data maximizing Gini and/or IV. You are correct in saying that datasets may be specific, however, it's generally agreed that tree-based models are the best for tabular datasets. With WOE bagging/boosting, I was hoping to show, we can get the best of both worlds (accuracy of ML models and explainability of scorecards). …more Like Reply Andrija Djurovic • 1st Risk Advisory 2y Denis Burakov in my previous comment, what I meant to say is that, although WoE is probably the most common encoding method used in practice, it is questionable whether we can generalize it as the best encoding method in traditional credit risk modeling. All the benefits you mentioned can, in fact, be addressed during the binning process. I always differentiate between binning and encoding as they are essentially two separate processes. …more Like Reply Andrija Djurovic • 1st Risk Advisory 2y Nikola Perović, FRM if the modelers have ready to use tools there is always time to test different options :) I think this is good example/area where the developers can experience the benefits of proper tools. Like 1 Reply Paul Edwards • 2nd Senior Director, Data Science | Wealthsimple 2y Yeah, WOE is agnostic to how you bin (discretize) features. As an encoding method I don’t know what “best” is but I will say that WOE has a strong basis in information theory justifying its use (you can derive WOE directly from Bayes rule!). It’s also a log-odds measure so it is a natural fit within a logistic regression framework. There’s nothing wrong with using your target to fit a model. Call it fitting a marginal effect, training a weak learner, or target encoding - it doesn’t cause overfitting. Not sure if we’re talking about the same dummy encoding, but your comment reminds me of a trick FICO people sometimes use to build scorecards. They used a binary indicator of bin membership in place of a WOE value. After the logistic regression step the result is the same, the beta coefficient contains the same information as the WOE value would. …more Like 3 Reply Nikola Perović, FRM • 2nd Quantitative Analyst. 2y Paul Edwards Indeed. Different WoE encoding logics can be applied yielding various outcomes, depending on the dataset and modelling choices made. For example, discretization with isotonic regression or gradient boosting can give more granular bins. Cheers. Like Reply Collapse replies Anton Treialt • 1st Risk Management | Leveraging AI 2y In your experience, how often is WoE used in the retail IRB modelling as opposed to other binning options? Like Reply 5 replies 5 Replies on Anton Treialt’s comment See previous replies Mariyan Matakiev • 2nd Head of Analytics CEE at Experian 2y for IRB binning + WoE is the easiest and therefore preferred approach for any type of variable. Like Reply Jakob Lavröd • 2nd Senior Quantitative Risk Analyst at Handelsbanken - Quantifying whatever risks tomorrow will bring 2y Great summary. WoE is very nice in that one builds a 1-variable model for each variable, and then in the next step aggregrate these models. However, what is your view on variables that are correlated and the risk of Simpsons paradox. If I have two variables that a somewhat correlated, the WoE for each will show the domninant relationship, but not be able to pick up the internal variation, which means that the WoE transformed variable lose information. …more Like 4 Reply 4 replies 4 Replies on Jakob Lavröd’s comment See previous replies Jakob Lavröd • 2nd Senior Quantitative Risk Analyst at Handelsbanken - Quantifying whatever risks tomorrow will bring 2y Paul Edwards Thank you for the comment. Indeed, that is sort of my point. The original WoE framework struggle to handle interactions directly. Will look into boosting with WoE 😊 Like 1 Reply Nikola Perović, FRM • 2nd Quantitative Analyst. (edited) 2y Denis Burakov Thanks for sharing, interesting read. Performance of other model candidates in this example is very close to WoE baseline - what is the added benefit of XGBoost usage here ? Results displayed add weight to the evidence (pun intended) that WoE + Logistic regression is a relatively simple yet powerful combination, which has stood the test of time, atleast in the area of Credit Risk model development. XGBoost and RandomForest can be used for feature building and selection, and for uncovering more complex relationships in the data. Also, as Jakob Lavröd commented performing WoE discretization leads to a loss of information as the modeller imposes a particular relationship between the bin values and bad/default rates. Constraining the information set before using ensemble approaches like RandomForest and XGBoost can be thought of as handicap, as there could be other, useful relationships in the data, apart from those imposed during WoE analysis. Cheers. …more Like 2 Reply 8 replies 8 Replies on Nikola Perović, FRM’s comment See previous replies Nikola Perović, FRM • 2nd Quantitative Analyst. 2y Paul Edwards Thanks for sharing! Like Reply George Bliatsios • 2nd Better Thinking. Fewer Tools. 2y Nice one Denis, thanks a lot for putting this together and for sharing the papers. Quite informative! Very well said, Weight of Evidence works well on a variety of cases. Although it could be a bit “annoying” in terms of maintenance/recalibration as fine tuning of the bins most likely will need to be repeated. Especially when for some attribute, new info comes up that was not available during development. But overall, imho is very useful technique! …more Like 1 Reply 2 replies 2 Replies on George Bliatsios’ comment See previous replies Paul Edwards • 2nd Senior Director, Data Science | Wealthsimple 2y True that. All these WOE models seem to have a shelf life. The best ideas ive heard to mitigate this are: Automatic retraining, ensembles of scorecards and replacing a weakened WOE feature with a similar one found during training. I have not seen any of those approaches used outside the lab Like 2 Reply Dai ZJ • 2nd Leader in Risk Modelling and Validation 2y WOE is a form of target encoding. Dummies work better in general Like Reply 2 replies 2 Replies on Dai ZJ’s comment See previous replies Denis Burakov Author Risk Modeling | Data Science on AWS | ML Engineering 2y Dai Z., I believe that WOE compared to one-hot (dummy) encoding is a better technique since it allows to represent the data more compactly. While dummy representation could be an option for categorical variables with low cardinality, for continuous variables this is an overkill, in my view. Like Reply Bayanda Dumezweni • 2nd Actuary | Credit Risk Modelling Leader | IFRS 9, Basel | Helping Banks Build Robust Risk Models 2y Thanks for sharing. Denis Burakov Andrija Djurovic, In my experience, WoE encoding works well for both categorical and continuous variables for a credit scorecard model. What is your experience in using WoE encoding outside a credit scoring model? Some practitioners prefer dummy variables encoding in this area. Like Reply 2 replies 2 Replies on Bayanda Dumezweni’s comment See previous replies Paul Edwards • 2nd Senior Director, Data Science | Wealthsimple 2y If I was building a binary classifier in a non-credit domain I'd probably just use XGB. Unless you have specialized contraints, XGB is the best off-the-shelf technique. Like 2 Reply Dejan J. • 2nd Head of Credit Risk Modeling | IFRS9 Scoring Rating IRB Consultant (edited) 2y Jakob Lavröd income as a variable even though I have used it in the Nordics and is a good variable in developed countires with low inflation, in developing countries or countires with higher inflation raw income is not the best variable to be used. When you have to have at least 5 years of data in your developing sample + 1 year observation period + potential OOT sample to test the model, having in mind that in Serbia the minimum salary in 2024 is almost equal to average from 2016, your PSI will skyrocket if you do not do some sort of transformation (e.g. income/average income, real income or similar) and the more time passes the raw income variable skews to the best bucket. Not to mention the part of income that is in our developing countires being paid under the table… …more Like 2 Reply Fatih Akdere • 2nd Lead Data Scientist | SKP 2y Marcel Jäger, Dieter Kurakov, Robert Fuchs 😁 Like 2 Reply Huy Tran • 2nd transire suum pectus mundoque potiri 2y I enjoyed the discussions following this post and Andrija Djurovic's one. One comment I'd like to add is about the overfitting phenomena of WoE. I observed that it happens when one categorical feature has many different values. Or even with "discrete" numerical features. I tried to prove this is always the case abstractly but have not succeeded yet :). As usual, one has to check the stability of the bins through time to see if it makes sense or is just a one-off event. …more Like 1 Reply 1 reply 1 Comment on Huy Tran’s comment Jakob Lavröd • 2nd Senior Quantitative Risk Analyst at Handelsbanken - Quantifying whatever risks tomorrow will bring 2y Good point Huy Tran The naïve solution to stabilizing the bins is the Jeffery correction of adding 1/2 to both 0 and 1 outcome, which corresponds to setting a jeffery prior on the probability in each bin. A somewhat more sophisticated solution is to use an hieratical model in which the probability pi of bin i is drawn from a distribution such as the beta distribution. As an added layer, one can also introduce monotonicity, requiring p(i +1 ) >= p(i) (if in order of increasing risk). Such construction means that each bin needs to have enough data to "convince" the model and overwhelm the prior. …more Like Reply Walter (W) • 2nd Superintendente | Risco de Modelo, Validação Independente e Controles Internos 2y Rangel Bastos Santos Like Reply Bruno Candéa • 2nd Financial Risks and Regulation Consulting Manager at PwC Brazil 2y Luiz Felipe Guedes da Silva, CFA, FRM, Giovanna Rodrigues Federici, Renan Fernandes Caetano Like Reply Alexandru Din • 2nd Quant in Credit Risk at Deloitte 2y Once again I really much like the emphasis you put on WoE, never understood why some prefer dummy variables to WoE in doing a logistic model. Like Reply Some comments may not be displayed in the Most relevant view. To see these comments, select Most recent. About Accessibility Help Center Privacy & Terms Ad Choices Advertising Business Services Get the LinkedIn app More LinkedIn Corporation © 2026 Status is online Messaging You are on the messaging overlay. Press enter to open the list of conversations. Compose message You are on the messaging overlay. Press enter to open the list of conversations.
