activity_id: 7152948849597132801
source_url: https://www.linkedin.com/posts/denisburakov_logistic-regression-the-two-cultures-activity-7152948849597132801-P7P_?utm_source=share&utm_medium=member_desktop
final_url: https://www.linkedin.com/posts/denisburakov_logistic-regression-the-two-cultures-activity-7152948849597132801-P7P_/?utm_source=share&utm_medium=member_desktop
title: (3) Post | LinkedIn
authenticated_surface: True

0 notifications total Skip to search Skip to main content Keyboard shortcuts Close jump menu new feed updates notifications Home 3 3 new network updates notifications My Network Jobs Messaging Notifications Me For Business Reactivate Premium: 50% Off Carlos Vergara Lead Data Scientist | Cloud AI Solutions Architect Bogota, D.C., Capital District EPAM Systems Achieve 4x more profile visits Reactivate Premium: 50% Off Profile viewers 297 Post impressions 403 Feed detail update Feed post Denis Burakov Denis Burakov • 1st Verified • 1st Risk Modeling | Data Science on AWS | ML Engineering Risk Modeling | Data Science on AWS | ML Engineering 2yr • 2 years ago • Visible to anyone on or off LinkedIn Is it correct to call logistic regression a classifier? ⇩ This question represents a focal point in hashtag #PredictiveModeling where the clash between the two cultures, as described by Leo Breiman in 2001, becomes obvious. The field of hashtag #MachineLearning arose somewhat independently of the field of hashtag #Statistics, and probabilistic modeling, the hallmark of statistics, has played a more modest role in the context of algorithmic modeling. The binary logistic regression model was developed primarily by David Cox (1958) and Strother Walker and David Duncan (1967). Logistic regression is deeply rooted in the concept of Maximum Likelihood Estimation (MLE), which was first advanced by the godfather of modern hashtag #Statistics, Ronald A. Fisher, in the 1920s ⇨ Fisher introduced MLE as a method for estimating the parameters of statistical models that best fit the observed data. As an early example of MLE, Fisher developed Linear Discriminant Analysis (LDA) in his 1936 paper "The Use of Multiple Measurements in Taxonomic Problems" 📑. The paper outlined a method for classifying observations into two or more classes based on a set of independent variables from the Iris dataset. Fisher's LDA did not produce probabilities, therefore by today’s terminology, Fisher’s method performed classification using MLE. Logistic regression, emerging three decades after Fisher's groundwork, optimizes the joint likelihood of inputs and labels through a linear model using MLE. The hallmark sigmoid function compresses logit outputs into a probability range (0 to 1), facilitating logistic regression's application in diverse fields like clinical diagnostics and credit scoring to discriminate risk. Classification, as has been outlined by F. Harrell, is only a part of logistic regression’s utility, which is achieved when we threshold probabilities ◍ to convert into binary outcomes ◑. While statisticians stress the probabilistic core of logistic regression, it can also be viewed as a technique capable of performing classification through modeling the posterior class distribution. This suggests that despite its focus on probability estimation and the subsequent optional label assignment, logistic regression shares the modeling objective for binary events seen in LDA, Naive Bayes (e.g., WOE), SVM, and other binary classification methodologies. Slide through the corresponding deck to this post to get a deeper insight into the arguments of the two cultures and share your thoughts in the comments ⬇️ ⚠ 𝐃𝐢𝐬𝐜𝐥𝐚𝐢𝐦𝐞𝐫: The work of eugenicists, which Ronald A. Fisher was a known member of, was often pervaded by prejudice against racial, ethnic and disabled groups. The online publication of this material for scholarly research purposes is not an endorsement of those views nor a promotion of eugenics in any way. ▬▬▬▬▬▬▬▬▬▬▬▬▬ Explore more on hashtag #CreditRiskModeling, hashtag #Lending, and hashtag #ModelRiskManagement, and stay updated by subscribing here: https://linktr.ee/deburky 🔔 Your document has finished loading 171 15 comments 14 reposts Reactions … Like Comment Repost Send Add a comment… Open Emoji Keyboard Current selected sort order is Most relevant Most relevant Adrian Olszewski • 1st Clinical Trials Biostatistician at 2KMM (100% R-based CRO) ⦿ Frequentist (non-Bayesian) paradigm ⦿ NOT a Data Scientist (no: ML/prediction/classification) ⦿ Poland :: Silesian voivodeship ⦿ pro 🚗🥩🏠 (edited) 2y Denis Burakov You nailed a very important problem and went through it in an awesome way, very detailed! So much work and references - I absolutely love it! 👏 My view is that the debate could be ended in just seconds, if the hashtag #ml community left the well-settled statistical definitions as they are and called this concrete application the "logistic classifier". This would immediately show that: 👍 the algorithm *uses* the regression output, is built on the top of it (yet it can be approached also via NN, the perceptron) 👍 the two exist and have different applications, that LR is used for other tasks outside ML 👍 it's the right time to stop denying daily work of thousands of statisticians who use the LR for other things than classification. In my presentation below I illustrated such a ridiculous situation I faced, where a data scientist was shocked and refused to help us because he could not understand how LR can be used for anything else outside ML For example, I've been using it on daily basis at work, but never for classification 👍 the name "logistic classifier" is consistent with its purpose, so no need to play the "LR is a misnomer" tone https://www.slideshare.net/AdrianOlszewski1/logistic-regression-vs-logistic-classifier …more Logistic regression vs. logistic classifier. History of the confusion and the role of Logistic Regression in experimental research Despite the wrong (yet widespread) claim, that "logistic regression is not a regression", it's one of the key regression tool in experimental research, like the clinical trials. It is used also for advanced testing hypotheses. The logistic regression... Like 6 Reply 3 replies 3 Replies on Adrian Olszewski’s comment Denis Burakov Author Risk Modeling | Data Science on AWS | ML Engineering 2y Thank you for sharing this amazing deck, Adrian Olszewski! I think you have assembled a very rich collection of books on Logistic Regression and the messages are indeed correct, it's never been a classifier, and in the original papers on LR I revisited they also don't mention any classification. But the question in today's reality is into which group should it be put? Regression? Probably not, because it operates with binary targets. To put LR in a separate ("hybrid") category will also not work. Hence, this "classification" of LR is probably here with us to stay. Avoiding the examples of people using 0.5 cut-off to build a confusion matrix for PD models, I can give one example where LR is used as a classification tool: application scoring. When determining a cut-off value of a score (by-product of LR) for approvals, we normally achieve to find the best split point between good and bad distributions. It eventually results in classification: either approved or rejected. …more Like Reply Adrian Olszewski • 1st Clinical Trials Biostatistician at 2KMM (100% R-based CRO) ⦿ Frequentist (non-Bayesian) paradigm ⦿ NOT a Data Scientist (no: ML/prediction/classification) ⦿ Poland :: Silesian voivodeship ⦿ pro 🚗🥩🏠 (edited) 2y Denis Burakov My intention was to just use appropriate terminology in ML literature: - when using for regression (which won't happen in hashtag #ML I guess), it predicts a numerically outcome by definition (as every other regression), namely the conditional expected value E(Y|X=x) for the Bernoulli conditional distribution of the response - the probability (or log-odds, depending on formulation). In my field, experimental (clinical) research we use mainly this outcome to explore the main, simple and interaction effects to assess the treatment effect + for testing statistical hypotheses about the % of success. We also use the LR to extend multiple other tests for binary outcomes, including the non-parametric ones. So the name "regression" stays here as most relevant. We don't do any classification here. - when using the LR output for classification (default in ML) we do additional step - the decision rule *applied* to the predicted conditional expectation, which creates a classifier. So here the name "classifier" applies. In other words, for classification they should use the proper name "logistic classifier" and don't worry about the regr., if they never do the other, reg. related tasks. Like below 😉 So the "naming collision" disappears …more Like 1 Reply Adrian Olszewski • 1st Clinical Trials Biostatistician at 2KMM (100% R-based CRO) ⦿ Frequentist (non-Bayesian) paradigm ⦿ NOT a Data Scientist (no: ML/prediction/classification) ⦿ Poland :: Silesian voivodeship ⦿ pro 🚗🥩🏠 2y Denis Burakov My dream is that one day the situation won't look like on the below picture... :) Regarding the books - I noticed, that every time a book infers the logistic regression from the GLM family, they never say "LR is a misnomer" because in this (GLM) frame the logistic, linear, Poisson, beta, gamma and many other regressions differ only by the conditional distribution of the response and the linking function (affecting the interpretation of the model coefficients). Maybe not "the same thing", but "of same class". For a statistician it doesn't matter what kind of variable we use as the response for the regression, because we have tools for everything: numerical Gaussian, skewed, truncated (tobit, beta), censored (e.g. in survival analysis), counts/integers, fractions and %, unordered and ordered categories, nested categories (hierarchical LR), all the above clustered/repeated (in many ways), with outliers, mean-variance relationships, multiple modes and so on. When a clinical trial sponsor asks me to evaluate the treatment effect, I just ask for the endpoint type (numeric, binary, time-to-event, etc) and use the common framework for performing these regression-centric and inferential analyses in a consistent manner. …more Like 2 Reply Collapse replies Simon Schwab (s²) • 2nd Statistician at Swisstransplant (edited) 2y Logistic regression is not a hybrid method, this only adds to the confusion. It is a probability machine and it is only a classifier if it is misused as such. According to your slides ML paracticioners prioritize predictive accuracy. A common threshold is P=0.50, so classifying P=0.51 as disease and P=0.49 as absence of disease is accurate? Classification is the wrong goal in medicine (maybe not in all situations, but in most situations), and ML people have a hard time to understand this. Tendencies such as a probability is more accurate and honest. So I'm very much in line with Frank Harrell's teachings. …more Like 4 Reply 3 replies 3 Replies on Simon Schwab (s²)’s comment See previous replies Denis Burakov Author Risk Modeling | Data Science on AWS | ML Engineering 2y Simon Schwab I agree with you, since these thresholds can move from sample to sample and cause incorrect results. In the context of costs, I frequently come across cost-sensitive learning as another approach. A good example was shown at EuroSciPy 2023 by one of scikit-learn's core developers: https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1IPXbEZpfrynjJMTXjI36rNGuPpOtY6_yJIrQOH6JBpI/edit#slide=id.p …more guillaume_lemaitre_euroscipy_2023 Get the best from your scikit-learn classifier EuroSciPy 2023 Guillaume Lemaitre - August 16, 2023 Like 2 Reply Awbath AlJaberi • 1st Navigating Chemical Processes and Water Engineering with a Focus on Data-Driven Excellence 2y Thanks for the detailed explanation, it is worth to mention that if the analyst need to reduce both bias and variance in parameter estimates, then the target estimation method could be the correct destination, this method could lead to more accurate and reliable results in statistical analysis. It could also improve the confidence intervals for the parameters and provide robustness in the presence of skewed distributions or outliers👌. This methodology is already incorporated into SAS statistical software for example. Overall, the target estimation method offers a systematic approach to improve the accuracy, reliability, and robustness of statistical analyses, particularly in the context of logistic regression models and other parametric situations. For more information please read this insightful paper "Target estimation for the logistic regression model" by Javier Cabrera,Vipul Devas &Luisa T. Fernholz …more Like 1 Reply Gabriel Ryan, FRM • 1st VP at DBS Bank (SG) - Risk & Data 2y Great post. Thanks for sharing. Like 1 Reply Davit Bidzhoian • 2nd Helping companies deploy AI agents into production MCP servers • deterministic pipelines • secure data access (edited) 2y There are several studies comparing results of ML models and logistic regression models. I can't say definitely that ML models are more accurate in most cases. Approximately in a half of cases logistic regression was more accurate then ML models. From my point of view there is no problem concerning with threshold value as a classification rule. I researched the question of the best value for the threshold and I came to the conclusion that the best value is the mean of dependent binary variable. But I agree, logistic regression is rather used to get probability then classify object. …more Like Reply 1 reply 1 Comment on Davit Bidzhoian’s comment Denis Burakov Author Risk Modeling | Data Science on AWS | ML Engineering 2y Thank you for sharing your insights, Davit. I believe the effectiveness of ML models versus logistic regression depends heavily on the nature of the datasets. In industries like credit, where data is structured and often linearly separable, logistic regression performs well. However, in my experience with underwriting data, ML models, particularly in the form of scorecards, have shown incremental improvements. The flexibility of ML allows it to capture nuanced patterns that logistic regression, limited to learning coefficients, might miss. Regarding your point on the mean of the dependent binary variable as the best threshold value, while I haven’t found strong evidence supporting this, it does seem plausible. In methods like Weight-of-Evidence and Naive Bayes, the average target variable does play a significant role. Your observations add an interesting perspective to the ongoing discussion. Thanks again for sharing. …more Like 1 Reply Aalekh Roy • 2nd Machine learning@Mendria | Risk, Uncertainty and Decision-Making | Applied ML for Complex Systems 2y Franky Saxena Like 1 Reply Alexandru Din • 2nd Quant in Credit Risk at Deloitte 2y Nice thing to classify Logistic Regression as both a classification and regression mechanism because indeed is used for both. I like as well the Logistic Regression eXtreme Gradient Boosting you mentioned. Like Reply zach T. • 2nd Industrial–Organizational Psychologist | Statistician & Psychometrician | Research Scientist 2y the good ol' prediction vs. explanation paradigm also maps onto this Tal Yarkoni Jake Westfall Like Reply About Accessibility Help Center Privacy & Terms Ad Choices Advertising Business Services Get the LinkedIn app More LinkedIn Corporation © 2026 Status is online Messaging You are on the messaging overlay. Press enter to open the list of conversations. Compose message You are on the messaging overlay. Press enter to open the list of conversations.
