activity_id: 7211748798618824704
source_url: https://www.linkedin.com/posts/denisburakov_creditriskmodeling-lending-modelriskmanagement-activity-7211748798618824704-BeWw
final_url: https://www.linkedin.com/posts/denisburakov_creditriskmodeling-lending-modelriskmanagement-activity-7211748798618824704-BeWw/
title: (3) Post | LinkedIn
authenticated_surface: True

0 notifications total Skip to search Skip to main content Keyboard shortcuts Close jump menu new feed updates notifications Home 3 3 new network updates notifications My Network Jobs Messaging Notifications Me For Business Reactivate Premium: 50% Off Carlos Vergara Lead Data Scientist | Cloud AI Solutions Architect Bogota, D.C., Capital District EPAM Systems Achieve 4x more profile visits Reactivate Premium: 50% Off Profile viewers 297 Post impressions 403 Feed detail update Feed post Denis Burakov Denis Burakov • 1st Verified • 1st Risk Modeling | Data Science on AWS | ML Engineering Risk Modeling | Data Science on AWS | ML Engineering 1yr • 1 year ago • Visible to anyone on or off LinkedIn Credit Scoring with Trended Data ↗ ↘ Trended credit scores are gaining attention in the lending industry as a valuable addition to a scoring toolbox 🪛. The key premise of trended scoring lies in its ability to provide a more comprehensive view of a consumer's financial behavior compared to single-point-in-time snapshots 🎞️ The concept of modeling trended attributes is not new, and recent industry use cases have demonstrated that deep learning models excel in this task 🚀. By leveraging neural network representations of raw transactions, model Gini scores can improve by 5-10 percentage points due to the incorporation of historical trends into the models 📈 Explore an end-to-end modeling approach designed to predict consumer defaults based on sequences of transactional data ⤵️ ▬ ▷ Explore more on hashtag #CreditRiskModeling, hashtag #Lending, hashtag #ModelRiskManagement, and stay updated by subscribing here: https://linktr.ee/deburky 🔔 ▬▬▬▬▬▬▬▬▬▬▬▬▬▬▬▬▬ All views expressed are my own. Activate to view larger image, 258 16 comments 14 reposts Reactions … Like Comment Repost Send Add a comment… Open Emoji Keyboard Current selected sort order is Most relevant Most relevant Rafael Matos, MSc. • 1st Credit Risk Modeling | IFRS 9 | Basel | Cost of Credit | Quantitative Finance | Retail Banking | Machine Learning | Data Science | Complex Systems MSc. (edited) 1y Denis Burakov Agreed! Trended attributes are more effective for behavior prediction as they map change patterns (recency, frequency, etc.). But while they are quite intuitive to understand, sometimes it requires some effort to define precisely what they really mean (e.g. when you use ratio of moving averages of two variables for a given time window). So, by the end you might want to check whether your feature engineering process also helped you to explain major variations to non-technical decision makers. …more Like 3 Reply 3 replies 3 Replies on Rafael Matos, MSc.’s comment Rafael Matos, MSc. • 1st Credit Risk Modeling | IFRS 9 | Basel | Cost of Credit | Quantitative Finance | Retail Banking | Machine Learning | Data Science | Complex Systems MSc. 1y As an example (in Physics), what comes after pop? Please don't say Taylor Swift haha CC: Gabriel Ryan, FRM Like 2 Reply Denis Burakov Author Risk Modeling | Data Science on AWS | ML Engineering (edited) 1y I learned about this technique from a data scientist working at my bank around 2018. In 2022, I saw a similar approach in a paper in the Journal of Risk Model Validation (https://www.risk.net/journal-of-risk-model-validation/7951416/an-end-to-end-deep-learning-approach-to-credit-scoring-using-cnn-c-xgboost-on-transaction-data). If you have access to this journal I recommend to have a look. This is a bit different from standard feature engineering. …more Like 2 Reply Rafael Matos, MSc. • 1st Credit Risk Modeling | IFRS 9 | Basel | Cost of Credit | Quantitative Finance | Retail Banking | Machine Learning | Data Science | Complex Systems MSc. 1y Rafael D. Iran Barros Denner Bocardi Guilherme Leonardi Like Reply Collapse replies Gabriel Ryan, FRM • 1st VP at DBS Bank (SG) - Risk & Data 1y Thanks for sharing. If I understand the concept correctly, indeed its not new. Typical scoring, to be robust, requires multiple "snapshots", say 3-4 annual cohorts such that some trends are embedded. Deep learning is a useful tool. One challenge is preserving the rank order or risk rank, at variable level and final score level. If we are doing a pure accept / reject prediction, I can see the benefits of deep learning. …more Like 8 Reply 1 reply 1 Comment on Gabriel Ryan, FRM’s comment Denis Burakov Author Risk Modeling | Data Science on AWS | ML Engineering 1y Yes, Ryan, there seem to be multiple opportunities for DL to be explored within Risk Analytics. Yet as I mentioned earlier, there are many other efficiency levers to be explored with our standard tools. Some curious data scientists may find this interesting though to bring in a fresh perspective! However, best of luck in explaining to regulators why the score changes... …more Like 1 Reply Anton Treialt • 1st Risk Management | Leveraging AI 1y What do you think is the main source of this additional explanatory power? Thinking out loud, this is not an opinion. If you have a trend in your data (because of changes in the product conditions, industry standards, etc), you want to maximise current predictive power and you are not bound by regulatory requirements, wouldn't it be easier just to use past 3 or 5 years of data to get rid of the less relevant parts of your dataset? The background of my question is that I have seen in quite a few cases that you indeed get a boost from using trend-related variables for datasets going back 10 - 15 years, but for the wrong reasons (e.g. because of industry-wide de-risking after 2009 crisis). …more Like 1 Reply 1 reply 1 Comment on Anton Treialt’s comment Denis Burakov Author Risk Modeling | Data Science on AWS | ML Engineering 1y Anton Treialt, PRM The main source of the additional explanatory power in this approach stems from the ability of these models to capture complex temporal dependencies and patterns in the data. Traditional models might not fully exploit that. The idea is to look at daily transaction sequences and identify trends indicative of default. For example, the last 90 days' transactions may indicate that an account is becoming delinquent if regular payments stop and spending increases. This can be described as a "flash summary" of credit risk. …more Like 1 Reply Matthew Freeman • 2nd AI Decision Support Analytics for Retail Credit Portfolios (supported by deep rooted modelling industry knowledge) 1y interesting, didn't we always use trended variables, particularly in behavioural models (where we look over a variety of differing time periods, i.e. last month, last 3, last 6, last 12, last 3 / prev 6 etc.) & as someone else has mention we may also use multiple sample points throughout a period from a technique point of view, NN have potential explainability issues, particularly from a model risk perspective as with everything, one needs to play with the data …more Like 14 Reply 3 replies 3 Replies on Matthew Freeman’s comment See previous replies Denis Burakov Author Risk Modeling | Data Science on AWS | ML Engineering 1y Matthew Freeman Indeed, hard to imagine at this stage, but still a lot of potential for use Like Reply Alfanendya Safudi, FRM, CFA • 2nd Head of Credit Portfolio Risk at PT Bank Mandiri (Persero) Tbk. 1y Some banks have been developing and using behavior scoring, relying on customer's financial pattern like payment patterns, CASA changes, delinquency patterns, etc, but I think mostly employ snapshots/point-to-point data cohort and conventional logistic regression method. It's interesting to know that behavior data can be treated as trend/continues and transform them into scorecard/model using neural network algorithm. Adi Aseno Vina Aprilianti …more Like 5 Reply Neelan Pather • 2nd Manager: Data Science @OMI | Actuary (FIA, CERA) | Gen AI InsureTech 1y FC de Vos (FIA, FASSA) Like Reply Yamati MANIGA • 2nd Graduated Actuary 1y Hortense Wogo Like Reply 1 reply 1 Comment on Yamati MANIGA’s comment Hortense Wogo • 3rd+ Actuaire | Gestionnaire ALM 1y Yamati MANIGA thanks ! Like Reply About Accessibility Help Center Privacy & Terms Ad Choices Advertising Business Services Get the LinkedIn app More LinkedIn Corporation © 2026 Status is online Messaging You are on the messaging overlay. Press enter to open the list of conversations. Compose message You are on the messaging overlay. Press enter to open the list of conversations.
