activity_id: 7302591232625541122
source_url: https://www.linkedin.com/feed/update/urn:li:activity:7302591232625541122/
final_url: https://www.linkedin.com/feed/update/urn:li:activity:7302591232625541122/
title: (3) Post | Feed | LinkedIn
authenticated_surface: True

0 notifications total Skip to search Skip to main content Keyboard shortcuts Close jump menu new feed updates notifications Home 3 3 new network updates notifications My Network Jobs Messaging Notifications Me For Business Reactivate Premium: 50% Off Carlos Vergara Lead Data Scientist | Cloud AI Solutions Architect Bogota, D.C., Capital District EPAM Systems Achieve 4x more profile visits Reactivate Premium: 50% Off Profile viewers 297 Post impressions 403 Feed detail update Feed post Denis Burakov Denis Burakov • 1st Verified • 1st Risk Modeling | Data Science on AWS | ML Engineering Risk Modeling | Data Science on AWS | ML Engineering 1yr • 1 year ago • Visible to anyone on or off LinkedIn Explainability and Scorecards 🎲 SHAP (SHapley Additive exPlanations) values have become the go-to tool for explainability in predictive modeling, and their popularity seems to be ever-growing, in part due to the lack of strong alternatives. Why? SHAP’s true hallmark lies in its ability to break down any model’s predictions into additive contributions from each input into the model. Much like Weight of Evidence (WOE) scores we know from credit scoring, SHAP values are additive and allow us to present something complex in a simpler form. But there’s a catch 🐘: SHAP values explain predictions, but not how the model actually works. Some researchers argue that because of this, SHAP scores can produce misleading information regarding feature importance and can induce bias in human decision-making, as discussed in this ACM paper: https://lnkd.in/dxHKBP5C Yet, SHAP’s additivity is a powerful tool for building scorecards that help monitor feature drift, distill complex models, and perform error analysis 🪛 Have you ever seen SHAP explanations misaligned with reality? How did you debug or validate them? Would love to hear your experiences! ⤵ Your document has finished loading 114 2 comments 5 reposts Reactions … Like Comment Repost Send Add a comment… Open Emoji Keyboard Current selected sort order is Most relevant Most relevant Octavian Stoica • 2nd Senior Specialist Lead la Deloitte Romania (edited) 1y I have seen such misalignment in the case of inclusion of drivers related to notching modules, of a traditional modelling approach, in a ML model together with other common quantitative drivers (financials, behavioural etc). For example, parental support rating Shap value did not match whit what was expected, the drift did not align with what the notching matrix established on business argumentation as increase/decrease in terms of grades. This is very strong argument, can be tied also with regulation, not to include in ML models the notching/support related risk drivers for which there are clear expectations of the result. …more Like 4 Reply 1 reply 1 Comment on Octavian Stoica’s comment Denis Burakov Author Risk Modeling | Data Science on AWS | ML Engineering 1y Octavian, thanks for sharing! Very interesting, and I am pretty sure most users of SHAP won’t deal with such scenarios. But for rating systems in general blindly using such tools can lead to unintended business outcomes as well as regulatory mistrust Like Reply About Accessibility Help Center Privacy & Terms Ad Choices Advertising Business Services Get the LinkedIn app More LinkedIn Corporation © 2026 Status is online Messaging You are on the messaging overlay. Press enter to open the list of conversations. Compose message You are on the messaging overlay. Press enter to open the list of conversations.
