activity_id: 7384120953489854464
source_url: https://www.linkedin.com/feed/update/urn:li:activity:7384120953489854464/
final_url: https://www.linkedin.com/feed/update/urn:li:activity:7384120953489854464/
title: (3) Post | Feed | LinkedIn
authenticated_surface: True

0 notifications total Skip to search Skip to main content Keyboard shortcuts Close jump menu new feed updates notifications Home 3 3 new network updates notifications My Network Jobs Messaging Notifications Me For Business Reactivate Premium: 50% Off Carlos Vergara Lead Data Scientist | Cloud AI Solutions Architect Bogota, D.C., Capital District EPAM Systems Achieve 4x more profile visits Reactivate Premium: 50% Off Profile viewers 297 Post impressions 403 Feed detail update Feed post Denis Burakov Denis Burakov • 1st Verified • 1st Risk Modeling | Data Science on AWS | ML Engineering Risk Modeling | Data Science on AWS | ML Engineering 7mo • 7 months ago • Visible to anyone on or off LinkedIn 📘 𝘞𝘦𝘪𝘨𝘩𝘵 𝘰𝘧 𝘌𝘷𝘪𝘥𝘦𝘯𝘤𝘦: 𝘍𝘳𝘰𝘮 𝘉𝘭𝘦𝘵𝘤𝘩𝘭𝘦𝘺 𝘗𝘢𝘳𝘬 𝘵𝘰 𝘊𝘳𝘦𝘥𝘪𝘵 𝘚𝘤𝘰𝘳𝘪𝘯𝘨 🧭 In 1941, Alan M. Turing turned wartime guesswork into arithmetic. He took odds in favor of a hypothesis (matching texts), logged them, and built an additive scoring system, a framework that later became foundational in credit scoring. This chapter traces that lineage from Turing's Factor Principle at Bletchley Park, through Jack Good and David MacKay, to modern credit scoring and explainable AI. 💡 In Q4, I plan to share another draft. I'm deciding between the one on SHAP (SHAP-WOE connection, trees, scorecards, and model distillation), and the one exploring the historical roots and modern applications of logistic regression, focusing on its unique role in statistics and machine learning. 🤝 We are also planning a collaboration with Paul Edwards on applications covering boosting and scorecards, combining theoretical foundations with practical implementations and deployment scenarios in Python 🐍. 💬 I’d love to hear your thoughts on the draft and hope you enjoy reading this first preview! hashtag #CreditScoring hashtag #DataScience hashtag #MachineLearning hashtag #InformationTheory Your document has finished loading 234 11 comments 16 reposts Reactions … Like Comment Repost Send Add a comment… Open Emoji Keyboard Current selected sort order is Most relevant Most relevant Alan Forrest • 2nd Model Risk Professional 7mo Denis Burakov Really enjoyed reading your draft chapter and I like very much your way of bringing the history of people and of ideas together, to track the entry of WoE into modern scorecarding. Also it's a pleasure to read about Pierce whom I had not heard of before. Many thanks. You mention base e and base 10, and you might add that base 2 information is measured in bits. You have some editorial work to do on some sections (eg repetitions in the historical notes on Fisher and Turing) but otherwise all reads well and I'll be interested in reading more. …more Like 3 Reply 1 reply 1 Comment on Alan Forrest’s comment Denis Burakov Author Risk Modeling | Data Science on AWS | ML Engineering 7mo Alan Forrest Thanks, Alan! I hope to refine these points in the next versions. Thank you for the feedback, much appreciated. Like 1 Reply Emanuel Baslios • 2nd Credit risk modelling & decisioning 7mo This is such a great read — and a reminder that weight of evidence isn’t just a statistical tool, it’s a way of thinking. Turing’s shift from multiplying probabilities to adding evidence changed more than codebreaking; it changed how we reason. Small, imperfect signals can build into overwhelming certainty when combined — the same principle behind every scorecard we use today. It also makes me wonder: additive scoring was born out of pencil-and-paper constraints. In an era where computation is virtually unlimited, are we sticking with it because it’s truly fundamental, or because we haven’t yet imagined the next leap that’s both powerful and explainable? Maybe the future of AI isn’t about prying open black boxes — it’s about returning to that original principle: evidence should accumulate, piece by piece, into understanding. - EB …more Like 1 Reply 1 reply 1 Comment on Emanuel Baslios’ comment Denis Burakov Author Risk Modeling | Data Science on AWS | ML Engineering 7mo Emanuel, thank you! Very well summarized, it's amazing to think how those early ideas got us all the way to where we are today. Like 1 Reply Johann van Rensburg, CQF • 2nd Data Scientist | Financial Engineer 7mo Thank you Denis Burakov for demystifying the Weight of Evidence and Shannon Surprise concepts, as it relates to practical Credit Risk Scoring and Credit Defaults. Inspiring also your previous posts about XGBoost Ensembles, SHAP Values Explained, Python code and other stuff. We should definitely never forget about Bletchley Park, Turing, Fisher, Good and all the Lady Codebreakers. Thank you for reminding us. 😊 …more Like 3 Reply 1 reply 1 Comment on Johann van Rensburg, CQF’s comment Denis Burakov Author Risk Modeling | Data Science on AWS | ML Engineering 7mo Johann, thank you! I am very glad you enjoyed reading it. Like 1 Reply Guilherme Marthe • 2nd Lead Data Scientist and Consultant | ex-Rappi | ex-Noverde 7mo Great read! Its been a while since I worked with credit scoring, but your text was one of the most enlightening on the theme of WoE I recall reading! Like 2 Reply 1 reply 1 Comment on Guilherme Marthe’s comment Denis Burakov Author Risk Modeling | Data Science on AWS | ML Engineering 7mo Very glad to hear, Guilherme! Appreciate the kind words and thanks for reading it through Like 1 Reply Naeem Siddiqi • 2nd Advisor | Credit Scoring | Climate Risk 7mo This is great work Denis Like 2 Reply 1 reply 1 Comment on Naeem Siddiqi’s comment Denis Burakov Author Risk Modeling | Data Science on AWS | ML Engineering 7mo Thank you, Naeem. I really appreciate that. Your work has been a big influence on how I got into this topic. Like 2 Reply Eugene Oliinyk • 3rd+ CTO with ML background, AI Solution Architect 6mo A fascinating link between Turing’s wartime mathematics and today’s credit scoring Like Reply About Accessibility Help Center Privacy & Terms Ad Choices Advertising Business Services Get the LinkedIn app More LinkedIn Corporation © 2026 Status is online Messaging You are on the messaging overlay. Press enter to open the list of conversations. Compose message You are on the messaging overlay. Press enter to open the list of conversations.
