activity_id: 7392833273737138176
source_url: https://www.linkedin.com/feed/update/urn:li:activity:7392833273737138176/
final_url: https://www.linkedin.com/feed/update/urn:li:activity:7392833273737138176/
title: (3) Post | Feed | LinkedIn
authenticated_surface: True

0 notifications total Skip to search Skip to main content Keyboard shortcuts Close jump menu new feed updates notifications Home 3 3 new network updates notifications My Network Jobs Messaging Notifications Me For Business Reactivate Premium: 50% Off Carlos Vergara Lead Data Scientist | Cloud AI Solutions Architect Bogota, D.C., Capital District EPAM Systems Achieve 4x more profile visits Reactivate Premium: 50% Off Profile viewers 297 Post impressions 403 Feed detail update Feed post Denis Burakov Denis Burakov • 1st Verified • 1st Risk Modeling | Data Science on AWS | ML Engineering Risk Modeling | Data Science on AWS | ML Engineering 6mo • 6 months ago • Visible to anyone on or off LinkedIn 📘 𝘓𝘰𝘨𝘪𝘴𝘵𝘪𝘤 𝘙𝘦𝘨𝘳𝘦𝘴𝘴𝘪𝘰𝘯: 𝘍𝘳𝘰𝘮 𝘔𝘢𝘹𝘪𝘮𝘶𝘮 𝘓𝘪𝘬𝘦𝘭𝘪𝘩𝘰𝘰𝘥 𝘵𝘰 𝘔𝘢𝘤𝘩𝘪𝘯𝘦 𝘓𝘦𝘢𝘳𝘯𝘪𝘯𝘨 What Alan Turing did for reasoning under uncertainty, Ronald Fisher did for learning from data. His 1922 breakthrough, the method of maximum likelihood, transformed a bewildering array of disconnected statistical techniques into a unified framework. It became the first real bridge between classical statistics and what we now call machine learning. You'll meet the pioneers who built the foundation of every modern predictive model: Chester Bliss's probit analysis in the 1930s, Joseph Berkson's elegant logistic simplification, and Fisher's likelihood principle that now powers the softmax function at the heart of language models like Claude and ChatGPT. This is the story of how classical statistical inference built a bridge to machine learning, with the historical details that will reveal they were never as separate as we thought. 👉Inside: hand-solved examples that build intuition, the mathematical equivalence between WOE and logistic coefficients, practical gradient descent for PD calibration, and extensions to multiclass problems with modern uncertainty quantification. Grateful to Andrija Djurovic for his thoughtful feedback on earlier drafts, and to Adrian Olszewski whose materials on logistic regression helped me shape my thinking throughout. hashtag #Statistics hashtag #CreditRisk hashtag #DataScience hashtag #MachineLearning hashtag #AI Your document has finished loading 323 10 comments 25 reposts Reactions … Like Comment Repost Send Add a comment… Open Emoji Keyboard Current selected sort order is Most relevant Most relevant Andrija Djurovic • 1st Risk Advisory 6mo Denis Burakov your work is definitely unique and helps bridge the gap between theory and practice in credit risk modeling. I am very confident that as you progress further, other practitioners will recognize it as one of the main sources for their daily work - and even more, as a source of new ideas and continuous improvement in the field of credit risk modeling. Good luck with your future work, and I look forward to further collaboration with you. …more Like 6 Reply 1 reply 1 Comment on Andrija Djurovic’s comment Denis Burakov Author Risk Modeling | Data Science on AWS | ML Engineering 6mo Many thanks for your comments and help with the draft, Andrija! Like 1 Reply Abderrahmane Derkaoui • 2nd MD - Assistant Pr in Epidemiology & Preventive Medicine - Public Health Consultant - Data Scientist - Digital Transformation Strategist 6mo Thanks for sharing this valuable text. The book please? Like 1 Reply 3 replies 3 Replies on Abderrahmane Derkaoui’s comment Denis Burakov Author Risk Modeling | Data Science on AWS | ML Engineering 6mo Abderrahmane, coming next year! Like 1 Reply Abisha M. • 2nd Data Scientist at FNB 6mo Denis Burakov where can we buy the book? Like Reply Denis Burakov Author Risk Modeling | Data Science on AWS | ML Engineering 6mo Abisha, coming next year! Like 1 Reply Collapse replies René Naarmann • 2nd Director 6mo Thanks for sharing and that you elaborate and deliver a bridge to history. Despite all technology in terms of ChatGPT, etc., a good scientific read and investing the time to critical thinking should not be underestimated! Sometime it is better to know than just to ask the right question and now where knowledge could be. Great posts Denis Burakov as always 💯 …more Like 1 Reply Gary Ang, PhD • 2nd AI × Risk × Finance | Accidental Computer Scientist x Artist | Former MAS AI risk lead and investment risk head | Developed MAS’ AI risk management guidelines (edited) 6mo This is a really nice read. Thanks for sharing. Like 2 Reply Firas Zaier • 2nd MD| Physician | Public Health & Health Data Science | AI & Machine Learning in Healthcare | Epidemiology & Biostatistics 6mo Thanks for sharing this! I am doing lots of reading in this context and this is definitely a nice chapter Like 1 Reply Luisa Fernanda Ames Santillán • 2nd Magister en Economía - Licenciada en Estadística 6mo Excelente Like 1 Reply About Accessibility Help Center Privacy & Terms Ad Choices Advertising Business Services Get the LinkedIn app More LinkedIn Corporation © 2026 Status is online Messaging You are on the messaging overlay. Press enter to open the list of conversations. Compose message You are on the messaging overlay. Press enter to open the list of conversations.
