activity_id: 7421824489165979649
source_url: https://www.linkedin.com/feed/update/urn:li:activity:7421824489165979649/
final_url: https://www.linkedin.com/feed/update/urn:li:activity:7421824489165979649/
title: (3) Post | Feed | LinkedIn
authenticated_surface: True

0 notifications total Skip to search Skip to main content Keyboard shortcuts Close jump menu new feed updates notifications Home 3 3 new network updates notifications My Network Jobs Messaging Notifications Me For Business Reactivate Premium: 50% Off Carlos Vergara Lead Data Scientist | Cloud AI Solutions Architect Bogota, D.C., Capital District EPAM Systems Achieve 4x more profile visits Reactivate Premium: 50% Off Profile viewers 297 Post impressions 403 Feed detail update Feed post Denis Burakov Denis Burakov • 1st Verified • 1st Risk Modeling | Data Science on AWS | ML Engineering Risk Modeling | Data Science on AWS | ML Engineering 3mo • 3 months ago • Visible to anyone on or off LinkedIn 📚 𝘾𝙧𝙚𝙙𝙞𝙩 𝙍𝙞𝙨𝙠 𝙈𝙤𝙙𝙚𝙡𝙞𝙣𝙜 𝙤𝙣 𝘼𝙒𝙎 ☁️ New chapter: MLflow experiment tracking with Amazon SageMaker MLflow was integrated with SageMaker in June 2024 as the recommended replacement for SageMaker Experiments. While Amazon Web Services (AWS) now offers MLflow Apps as a managed serverless experience, this guide focuses on the original tracking server pattern. ✓ Develop and test your entire ML pipeline locally with LocalStack, then deploy to production with confidence ✓ All code examples use real-world credit scoring datasets (HELOC) and demonstrate production-ready patterns for experiment tracking, model versioning, and artifact management 🔗 GitHub repo: https://lnkd.in/d3itQCBi hashtag #CreditRisk hashtag #AWS hashtag #DataScience hashtag #MLOps hashtag #FinTech Your document has finished loading 99 Rafael Matos, MSc. and 98 others 5 comments 5 reposts Reactions +91 Like Comment Repost Send Add a comment… Open Emoji Keyboard Current selected sort order is Most relevant Most relevant Meisam G. • 2nd Data Scientist 3mo Nice and well-structured solution, Denis 👍 One important credit-risk nuance from a Basel perspective: although PD is trained on a binary default outcome, it is not used as a classification model in practice. PD is primarily a ranking model whose job is to correctly order obligors by risk. The reason is exposure. Two borrowers with the same PD can have very different impact on the portfolio depending on EAD (and LGD). A pure “good vs bad” cutoff ignores that a small number of high-exposure borrowers can dominate capital and loss. For that reason, thresholds should usually be set at the policy layer, based on expected loss or capital impact (PD × EAD × LGD), not optimized directly during training. This also makes it much clearer for stakeholders to answer questions like: “If we reject the riskiest 10%, how much portfolio loss do we actually reduce?” I’d keep the model focused on ranking quality (Gini/AUC + calibration) and derive accept / review / reject bands from exposure-weighted portfolio trade-offs. …more Like 2 Reply 1 reply 1 Comment on Meisam G.’s comment Denis Burakov Author Risk Modeling | Data Science on AWS | ML Engineering 3mo Meisam G. I have the same view on confusion based metrics, I prefer to use Gini / Somers' D in my work. In my FastWoe package I provide an efficient continuous Somers' D calculation for targets like LGD/EAD as well as Gini weighted by EAD (or another metric of choice) Like Reply Abdul A. • 2nd Strategist | Skeptical Empiricist | Pragmatist 3mo Quick question: Is this intended as a challenger model? If so, is there an existing champion (e.g., a scorecard) that it is benchmarked or calibrated against, and how is ongoing performance alignment monitored? Like 1 Reply 1 reply 1 Comment on Abdul A.’s comment Denis Burakov Author Risk Modeling | Data Science on AWS | ML Engineering 3mo Abdul, the experiment tracking lets us test multiple model configurations (new features, data sources, different algorithms, selection metrics) and objectively identify which challenger beats the champion. Once we promote a challenger to production, we'd use tools like NannyML/Evidently/SageMaker Monitor for ongoing drift and performance monitoring …more Like 1 Reply Meisam G. • 2nd Data Scientist 3mo One more point I really like in your approach is the focus on model monitoring 👍 For credit-risk models, I’d go one step further and be proactive about macro-driven data drift (e.g. inflation, rate environment, cost of living). These factors can silently shift feature distributions and PD calibration over time. In many risk setups, it’s actually safer to exclude highly cyclical macro variables at feature-engineering time and treat them as scenario or stress inputs instead, rather than letting them leak into PD and then correcting only after performance deteriorates. That tends to give more stable ranking over the cycle and clearer governance than waiting for adverse impact to show up years later. …more Like 1 Reply About Accessibility Help Center Privacy & Terms Ad Choices Advertising Business Services Get the LinkedIn app More LinkedIn Corporation © 2026 Status is online Messaging You are on the messaging overlay. Press enter to open the list of conversations. Compose message You are on the messaging overlay. Press enter to open the list of conversations.
