activity_id: 7423998736009375745
source_url: https://www.linkedin.com/feed/update/urn:li:activity:7423998736009375745/
final_url: https://www.linkedin.com/feed/update/urn:li:activity:7423998736009375745/
title: (3) Post | Feed | LinkedIn
authenticated_surface: True

0 notifications total Skip to search Skip to main content Keyboard shortcuts Close jump menu new feed updates notifications Home 3 3 new network updates notifications My Network Jobs Messaging Notifications Me For Business Reactivate Premium: 50% Off Carlos Vergara Lead Data Scientist | Cloud AI Solutions Architect Bogota, D.C., Capital District EPAM Systems Achieve 4x more profile visits Reactivate Premium: 50% Off Profile viewers 297 Post impressions 403 Feed detail update Feed post Denis Burakov Denis Burakov • 1st Verified • 1st Risk Modeling | Data Science on AWS | ML Engineering Risk Modeling | Data Science on AWS | ML Engineering 3mo • 3 months ago • Visible to anyone on or off LinkedIn What’s a Gini point worth? Some thoughts on model economics 💵 A common view is that the Gini score of a credit scoring model is detached from real business outcomes. Gini is a core metric in credit risk, measuring how well a model separates good borrowers from bad ones. Gini is directly related to AUC (the concordance probability). If AUC represents 𝖯(𝖼𝗈𝗇𝖼𝗈𝗋𝖽𝖺𝗇𝗍), then: 𝖦𝗂𝗇𝗂 = 𝖯(𝖼𝗈𝗇𝖼𝗈𝗋𝖽𝖺𝗇𝗍) − 𝖯(𝖽𝗂𝗌𝖼𝗈𝗋𝖽𝖺𝗇𝗍). While AUC measures the probability that a randomly chosen defaulter scores higher than a randomly chosen non-defaulter, Gini rescales this so that a random model equals zero, making the gap between model and chance directly readable. This leads to the familiar identity: 𝖦𝗂𝗇𝗂 = 𝖠𝖴𝖢 − (𝟣 − 𝖠𝖴𝖢) = 𝟤 × 𝖠𝖴𝖢 − 𝟣. Practitioners know this formula well. The harder question is: 𝘏𝘰𝘸 𝘥𝘰𝘦𝘴 𝘢 𝘩𝘪𝘨𝘩𝘦𝘳 𝘎𝘪𝘯𝘪 𝘵𝘳𝘢𝘯𝘴𝘭𝘢𝘵𝘦 𝘪𝘯𝘵𝘰 𝘣𝘶𝘴𝘪𝘯𝘦𝘴𝘴 𝘷𝘢𝘭𝘶𝘦? This link is surprisingly under-discussed. Below is a simple experimental framework to spark a conversation. 𝗖𝗮𝘀𝗲 𝟭. 𝗙𝗶𝘅𝗲𝗱 𝗥𝗶𝘀𝗸 𝗔𝗽𝗽𝗲𝘁𝗶𝘁𝗲 🏦 Assume we target a 5% bad rate across our approved portfolio. Since both models operate at the same risk level, unit economics are identical, and the comparison becomes purely about incremental volume. A 10-point Gini improvement between models (41% → 51%) allows approving 13% more customers at the same 5% bad rate. 𝗖𝗮𝘀𝗲 𝟮. 𝗩𝗮𝗿𝗶𝗮𝗯𝗹𝗲 𝗨𝗻𝗶𝘁 𝗘𝗰𝗼𝗻𝗼𝗺𝗶𝗰𝘀 💳 Now imagine we don’t have a fixed risk appetite. Instead, we approve loans only when expected unit economics are positive. 𝖴𝗇𝗂𝗍 𝖤𝖼𝗈𝗇𝗈𝗆𝗂𝖼𝗌 = 𝖤𝖠𝖣 × [(𝟣− 𝖯𝖣) × 𝖬𝖺𝗋𝗀𝗂𝗇 − 𝖯𝖣] Where EAD is the loan size and PD is a calibrated probability of default. Margin is the expected return on performing loans. Here, each loan contributes expected profit based on its calibrated PD, and we sum these across all approved loans. The optimal approval rate is where we have accepted all loans with positive expected value. A stronger model identifies more truly low-risk borrowers and better isolates high-risk ones. At similar approval rates (48% vs 55%), Model B approves a better risk mix, earning 44% more profit with 10 points of Gini improvement. ▬▬▬▬▬▬▬▬▬▬▬▬▬▬▬▬▬ In practice, do you think about model performance in terms of risk appetite or unit economics? And how do you put a business value on an extra Gini point? hashtag #CreditRiskModeling hashtag #Lending hashtag #DataScience hashtag #CreditScoring Activate to view larger image, 221 6 comments 12 reposts Reactions … Like Comment Repost Send Add a comment… Open Emoji Keyboard Current selected sort order is Most relevant Most relevant Gellért Peti • 2nd Decision Feasibility & Stop-Authority in Prudential Capital Architecture (Basel / IFRS / SRT / Real Assets) 3mo The translation from Gini to business value is directionally correct, but it holds only in a decision space where risk appetite is discretionary. In regulated balance sheets, that space is truncated by ICAAP, concentration limits, capital scarcity and model governance constraints. Beyond a certain point, incremental Gini does not buy volume or profit it buys permission. Higher discriminatory power matters only insofar as it restores admissibility under binding capital, portfolio concentration or model-risk limits. Once those constraints bind, optimisation on unit economics becomes irrelevant; the question is whether the model outcome is allowed to be acted upon at all. From a Basel perspective, the real economic value of a Gini point is therefore not incremental margin, but its ability to preserve decision authority under Pillar 2 delaying limit breaches, preventing concentration lock-in, and maintaining reversibility when growth would otherwise have to stop. …more Like 7 Reply 1 reply 1 Comment on Gellért Peti’s comment Denis Burakov Author Risk Modeling | Data Science on AWS | ML Engineering 3mo Gellért Peti really like your perspective on permission aspect, thank you for sharing. Like 2 Reply Marc van der Zon, CFA • 3rd+ Head of AI and Data - Hollard Insurance SA 2mo Great paper well done. I did something similar a couple years back by looking at all (simulated) gini curve possibilities and the resultant change in approval rates of credit card applications....from this i'll add another variable into your mix. there are certain scenarios where the gini is the same but the shape is different and can influence value. The other insight was if the PD of the population was below your cut off rate the additional points added had a smaller impact than the opposite. So the difference between the break even PD and population PD is another driver. Thanks for keeping my brain sharp :) …more Like 1 Reply 1 reply 1 Comment on Marc van der Zon, CFA’s comment Denis Burakov Author Risk Modeling | Data Science on AWS | ML Engineering 2mo Thanks, Marc! Really great observations on Gini curve shape vs. value trade-offs. I explored something related - since the CAP curve's y-axis is TPR/recall, we can compare models based on recall@top-p (at 5%, 10%, etc. of the population). This helps distinguish models with similar Gini but different capture rates at specific cutoffs. This was a material from a while back: https://www.linkedin.com/posts/denisburakov_cap-curve-and-recall-top-p-activity-7330853620843757568-jdET?utm_source=share&utm_medium=member_desktop&rcm=ACoAAAi24j8BDeyrA2v49v1zdgxvmpNSr3_xGDU Your point about PD vs. cutoff rate is also very important from practical standpoint, a model with great overall Gini might not perform equally well in the range one actually uses for decisions. …more CAP Curve and Recall @ Top p | Denis Burakov Summary performance metrics like Gini, Somers' D or AUC are standard tools for evaluating risk scoring models, but a "pretty" AUC can hide critical performance gaps. The Cumulative Accuracy Profile (CAP) reveals what summary statistics miss by... Like Reply Asko Kauppinen • 2nd Principal Consultant at Ready Solutions Oy 2mo Denis Burakov several years ago I created an score - cutoff function to evaluate decision boundary whether to approve loan or not at particular scorecard score point. For me AUC or Gini is global metric but this netprofit function is more business context tied one metric. …more Like Reply Sylvain Raynes • 2nd Risk Management, Valuation and Structured Finance Professional 3mo Well done Denis. This is the heart of the matter. Like 2 Reply About Accessibility Help Center Privacy & Terms Ad Choices Advertising Business Services Get the LinkedIn app More LinkedIn Corporation © 2026 Status is online Messaging You are on the messaging overlay. Press enter to open the list of conversations. Compose message You are on the messaging overlay. Press enter to open the list of conversations.
