activity_id: 7429434643583725571
source_url: https://www.linkedin.com/feed/update/urn:li:activity:7429434643583725571/
final_url: https://www.linkedin.com/feed/update/urn:li:activity:7429434643583725571/
title: (3) Post | Feed | LinkedIn
authenticated_surface: True

0 notifications total Skip to search Skip to main content Keyboard shortcuts Close jump menu new feed updates notifications Home 3 3 new network updates notifications My Network Jobs Messaging Notifications Me For Business Reactivate Premium: 50% Off Carlos Vergara Lead Data Scientist | Cloud AI Solutions Architect Bogota, D.C., Capital District EPAM Systems Achieve 4x more profile visits Reactivate Premium: 50% Off Profile viewers 297 Post impressions 403 Feed detail update Feed post Denis Burakov Denis Burakov • 1st Verified • 1st Risk Modeling | Data Science on AWS | ML Engineering Risk Modeling | Data Science on AWS | ML Engineering 3mo • 3 months ago • Visible to anyone on or off LinkedIn You'll often see claims that Gini score isn't suitable for imbalanced problems. Credit risk problems are imbalanced by nature (if your default rate > 50%, the business probably isn't there anymore), and Gini is exactly the right metric in this setting. Take as an example a portfolio with a ~10% default rate and relatively strong credit score. Here's what a CAP diagram will show: • 𝘕𝘶𝘮𝘦𝘳𝘢𝘵𝘰𝘳 (0.469): Area between model and random line • 𝘋𝘦𝘯𝘰𝘮𝘪𝘯𝘢𝘵𝘰𝘳 (1−DR = 0.903): Maximum achievable area given DR • 𝘎𝘪𝘯𝘪 (Accuracy Ratio): 0.469 / 0.903 = 51.9% The DR adjustment in this formula is what enables fair comparison across portfolios with different default rates. With the same raw ranking power (numerator = 0.4), a model achieving 42% Gini at 5% DR (0.4/0.95) is actually weaker than one achieving 50% Gini at 20% DR (0.4/0.80). Accounting for class imbalance through the DR constraint is what makes Gini the standard for measuring model discrimination in credit risk. hashtag #CreditRisk hashtag #DataScience hashtag #CreditScoring hashtag #ModelRisk hashtag #ModelValidation Activate to view larger image, Activate to view larger image, 535 Sebastian Uribe Ocampo and 534 others 44 comments 23 reposts Reactions … Like Comment Repost Send Add a comment… Open Emoji Keyboard Current selected sort order is Most relevant Most relevant Manoj Nayak • 2nd Founder @ 6th-Sense | Solving real-world problems with data, AI, and experience—one product, model, and person at a time 3mo Just to clarify terminology in this discussion: When we compute “Gini” in SAS, R, or Python for binary classification models, we are computing Somers’ D. Gini = 2 × AUC − 1 In the credit risk literature, this quantity is mathematically identical to the Accuracy Ratio (AR) derived from the CAP curve. So: Somers’ D = Accuracy Ratio (CAP) = 2 × AUC − 1 This equivalence is well established in the literature: - Engelmann, Hayden & Tasche (2003) – Measuring the Discriminative Power of Rating Systems https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=2793951 - Basel Committee (2005) – Working Paper No. 14 Studies on the Validation of Internal Rating Systems https://www.bis.org/publ/bcbs_wp14.pdf - Hamerle, Rauhmeier & Rösch (2003) – Uses and Misuses of Measures for Credit Rating Accuracy - Tasche (2006) – Validation of Internal Rating Systems and PD Estimates - Harrell (2015) – Regression Modeling Strategies In other words, the “Somers’ D Gini” reported by statistical software and the “Accuracy Ratio” from the CAP curve are not different metrics , they are the same rank-based discrimination measure expressed through ROC and CAP geometry. …more Like 8 Reply 8 replies 8 Replies on Manoj Nayak’s comment Dr Francis Babi • 2nd International Head (Associate Director) of Data Science at QED Actuaries & Consultants | Masters in Financial Engineering | MSc Veterinary Science | BSc Honours Financial Modelling | BSc Mathematical Modelling 3mo Manoj Nayak Correct! Why not use all the metrics? F1 scores for defaults and nod-defaults - measures that combine both recall and precision. The issue is not on the use of the Accuracy to gauge the performance of the model but on how the model performs on unseen data and the Accuracy is hardly the best metric to use for that purpose. Like 2 Reply Julian Borisov • 2nd Data Science & Leadership 3mo Manoj Nayak man, I could treat that whole topic as a click bait, just because the guy works for aws. Like Reply Denis Burakov Author Risk Modeling | Data Science on AWS | ML Engineering 3mo Manoj Nayak in the post I clearly state Gini (Accuracy ratio). I am not sure what the comment is. If you are looking for a practical implementation, check out fastwoe package if you use Python. Like Reply Denis Burakov Author Risk Modeling | Data Science on AWS | ML Engineering 3mo Julian Borisov I don't work for AWS! Like Reply Manoj Nayak • 2nd Founder @ 6th-Sense | Solving real-world problems with data, AI, and experience—one product, model, and person at a time 3mo Thanks Denis Burakov, yes we are aligned. My intention was simply to clarify terminology. The word “Gini” is used in multiple contexts and different software sometimes reports different variants. In credit risk / binary classification, the correct Gini we refer to is the Somers’ D–based discrimination measure: Gini = 2 × AUC − 1 Which is equivalent to the CAP-based Accuracy Ratio. Since there are also inequality Gini measures and non-normalised CAP areas, I just wanted to avoid any ambiguity around which Gini is being discussed. …more Like Reply Manoj Nayak • 2nd Founder @ 6th-Sense | Solving real-world problems with data, AI, and experience—one product, model, and person at a time 3mo Dr Francis Babi absolutely agree. Accuracy Ratio / Gini is only one part of the validation framework. In practice, model validation — especially under Basel, IFRS 9, CECL, or SR 11-7 guidance — is much broader. We typically assess: • Discrimination (Gini / AUC / AR) • Calibration (PD accuracy, Brier score, backtesting) • Stability (PSI, population drift, rank stability) • In-sample vs out-of-sample performance • Sensitivity and stress testing • Parametric and non-parametric tests Basel Working Paper 14 lays the foundation for discrimination measures, but regulatory validation frameworks require a holistic evaluation before gaining confidence in a model. So yes, one should not rely solely on Accuracy Ratio. It must be part of a broader validation ecosystem. …more Like 1 Reply Denis Burakov Author Risk Modeling | Data Science on AWS | ML Engineering 3mo Manoj Nayak we could also express it as AUC - (1 - AUC), P(concordant) - P(discordant), Somers' Dxy, and actually there's quite more to it. Great books and papers btw! Like 1 Reply Julian Borisov • 2nd Data Science & Leadership 3mo Denis Burakov my bad Like 1 Reply Collapse replies Wesley Deelman • 3rd+ Data Science, Decision Science 3mo The Gini, which is linearly related to the AUC, is the probability that a randomly selected positive example would be ranked higher than a randomly selected negative example, with respect to the score (calculated probability). Following this definition it is very easy to see that the fewer positive examples you have due to class imabalance, the more likely it is, that if positive examples were ranked higher than negative ones by chance, the result would be less meaningful, due to the disproportionate effect of the count of positive examples on the AUC thus Gini. How does this DR in the denominator account for the Gini not being adjusted/weighted by the event distribution? …more Like Reply 8 replies 8 Replies on Wesley Deelman’s comment See previous replies Henry Ramsey • 2nd Experienced CCO, CRO, CEO - Over 20 Years Financial Services Experiences, Military Veteran 3mo Denis Burakov So tell me how mercedes crash tests 1000 cars a year. :) Like Reply Henry Ramsey • 2nd Experienced CCO, CRO, CEO - Over 20 Years Financial Services Experiences, Military Veteran 3mo Been the same for 30 years - Gini, KS, AUC, etc.. there are no single measure ways to evaluate model performance. Like 1 Reply 3 replies 3 Replies on Henry Ramsey’s comment See previous replies Henry Ramsey • 2nd Experienced CCO, CRO, CEO - Over 20 Years Financial Services Experiences, Military Veteran 3mo I do recall this one : 1) Separation of predictions - high to low, good to bad, whatever 2) Predicts Accurately 3) Autocorrelation is absent 4) Rank Orders in the fashion the scores are designed. 5) Lift As one boss used to say - if should be like a good bra - it needs to lift and separate and be the right size. There is other stuff like checking multicollinearity, parsimony is good, should be able to be generalized across broad populations, etc... But I am rambling. …more Like Reply Yehuda Raanan • 2nd Applied AI Researcher (Thesis & Upskilling Phase) 3mo Interesting perspective on the Gini coefficient in credit risk. While it is a standard metric, I believe there are a few critical limitations to consider: A. Gini is not always a reliable tool for comparing models across different populations or variable sets. Even a slight shift in the population size or composition can yield different Gini results for the same underlying model logic. B. 'Gini Hacking' - Focusing solely on Gini can lead to the inclusion of variables that are highly correlated with default (close-to-default indicators). While this boosts the score, it often happens at the expense of variables that provide better discrimination among lower-risk segments, which is where the real business value often lies. Precision vs. Recall - We must consider the model's application. Gini essentially represents ranking/recall without accounting for precision. In a business context where rejecting a 'good' customer carries a high cost, relying only on Gini can lead to expensive decision-making errors. So, selecting the right metric should always depend on the specific business constraints and the trade-off between risk and opportunity …more Like 3 Reply 3 replies 3 Replies on Yehuda Raanan’s comment See previous replies Denis Burakov Author Risk Modeling | Data Science on AWS | ML Engineering 3mo Yehuda Raanan Now I think I get your point. Like any metric, it's not a panacea, in the end it's just a rank correlation coefficient. What I found useful in this scenario is a P&L-based analysis, it doesn't take fixed cost-benefit matrix but relies on profit scoring. This approach isn't very popular though Like Reply Abdolamir Karbalaie • 2nd Senior Data Scientist | ML Engineer (PhD) | Trustworthy AI | Clinical AI 3mo The finding that raw ranking power is deceptive without the DR denominator is an important distinction. Does this scaling remain stable when dealing with extremely low default rates, such as those under 0.5%, where the denominator approaches 1? Like 1 Reply 3 replies 3 Replies on Abdolamir Karbalaie’s comment See previous replies Denis Burakov Author Risk Modeling | Data Science on AWS | ML Engineering 3mo Abdolamir Karbalaie I think this is exactly the area where we don't have an established methodology yet. In theory, if ranking is unchanged and the shift is purely due to increased DR, it is possible to normalize the raw ranking to account for the change; this will give a new adjusted coefficient. The big assumption here is ranking itself remains stable. This needs further research, which I am currently exploring. …more Like 1 Reply Talha Qayyum • 2nd Credit Risk - Data Scientist | Risk Analytics Modeling | MarTech | Scorecarding | Machine Learning | Gen AI | Public Service | Mentor 3mo Do you gini is more of a data dependent? Sometimes power of the data relies on demographical region which your targeting. E.g gini of 35-45% is okay within african region , at europe i saw 55-65% as well. Its the juice which you can extract maximum out of the given dataset in hand. …more Like 1 Reply 2 replies 2 Replies on Talha Qayyum’s comment See previous replies Denis Burakov Author Risk Modeling | Data Science on AWS | ML Engineering 3mo Nicolas Miller Talha Qayyum I think it really depends on the input quality. Generally if the quality of bureau data is low, we shouldn’t expect miracles. However, transactional data is another story where we should see less variation across region as this is a gold mine Like Reply Igbokweuche Chukwuebuka • 2nd Senior Fullstack Engineer | Machine Learning | Data Science | MLOps | Building intelligent Systems 3mo As a up and comer in data science I am a bit confused from the comments quite a few opposing opinions where then does gini shine what are the drawbacks basing decisions on it as every credit risk dataset i have ever seen is imbalanced can someone clarify for me or point me to a resource Like Reply 1 reply 1 Comment on Igbokweuche Chukwuebuka’s comment Denis Burakov Author Risk Modeling | Data Science on AWS | ML Engineering 3mo Igbokweuche Chukwuebuka this source has been the best discussion I've seen so far. It's not about Gini, but it talks about imbalance as "a problem" in general https://datascience.stackexchange.com/questions/134389/is-class-imbalance-really-a-problem-in-machine-learning …more Is class imbalance really a problem in machine learning? Following on from my recent post on the topic, my goal here is to synthesise the excellent community wisdom on it over at Cross Validated into a "canonical" Q&A for the data science S... Like 1 Reply Víctor Acevedo Vitvitskaya, CQF • 2nd Chapter Leader Data Scientist - COE Advanced Analytics 2mo I completely agree. This misconception appears surprisingly often. ROC-AUC evaluates the model’s ranking ability — the probability that a randomly chosen positive receives a higher score than a randomly chosen negative. Because it is based on relative ranking rather than class counts, it is invariant to class imbalance. What imbalance actually affects are operational metrics such as precision, recall, or business thresholds, not the model’s intrinsic discriminatory power captured by ROC-AUC (or equivalently the Gini coefficient). …more Like 1 Reply Shubham Sirothia • 2nd Data Science | Analytics - Product/ Pricing/ Customer/ Marketing | A/B Testing | Ex-Walmart, Grainger | Increased margin by $100M+, solved problems for 10M+ customers and 1M+ SKUs 3mo Optimizing precision or recall would be better in case of data imbalance vs gini index Like 1 Reply 1 reply 1 Comment on Shubham Sirothia’s comment Aleksa Milovanovic • 3rd+ Data Science Hub leader at NLB DigIT (edited) 2mo Shubham Sirothia completely agree. Also the area under the P-R curve can be quite an useful metric for highly imbalanced data. Like 1 Reply Jake Peace • 2nd Independent AI Researcher 3mo Some independent trials I performed leveraged a synthetic y on decision trees, particularly z-score normalization similar to my HVRT framework. I found that representation was well-adjusted, but predictive power was lacking. In my existing HVRT framework for deterministic sample reduction, it does better preserve anomalies and underrepresented classes, provided they have some degree of variance. Might be worth exploring for credit risk 😊 …more Like Reply Peter Urbani • 2nd KnowRisk Consulting (edited) 3mo There is also a direct linkage of the absolute Lorenz curve ( as opposed to relative one used in Gini ) to CVaR https://www.researchgate.net/publication/228906308_Portfolio_Risk_Management_Using_the_Lorenz_Curve Like Reply Samuele Messina • 2nd Actuarial Advisor at QBE 3mo Virtually all commentary around the issues of imbalanced data is wrong and is purely a result of holding false priors about machine learning models and statistics. Like 1 Reply Jorge Hernández • 3rd+ Risk Modeling Manager at BANCO CARIBE 2mo Diego Colón Like 1 Reply Walter (W) • 2nd Superintendente | Risco de Modelo, Validação Independente e Controles Internos 2mo Anderson Schilithz Aline Menezes Beatriz Nogueira Pereira Like 1 Reply Gini 1,011 followers 3mo 👏 Like Reply About Accessibility Help Center Privacy & Terms Ad Choices Advertising Business Services Get the LinkedIn app More LinkedIn Corporation © 2026 Status is online Messaging You are on the messaging overlay. Press enter to open the list of conversations. Compose message You are on the messaging overlay. Press enter to open the list of conversations.
