activity_id: 7436682459037089793
source_url: https://www.linkedin.com/feed/update/urn:li:activity:7436682459037089793/
final_url: https://www.linkedin.com/feed/update/urn:li:activity:7436682459037089793/
title: (3) Post | Feed | LinkedIn
authenticated_surface: True

0 notifications total Skip to search Skip to main content Keyboard shortcuts Close jump menu new feed updates notifications Home 3 3 new network updates notifications My Network Jobs Messaging Notifications Me For Business Reactivate Premium: 50% Off Carlos Vergara Lead Data Scientist | Cloud AI Solutions Architect Bogota, D.C., Capital District EPAM Systems Achieve 4x more profile visits Reactivate Premium: 50% Off Profile viewers 297 Post impressions 403 Feed detail update Feed post Denis Burakov Denis Burakov • 1st Verified • 1st Risk Modeling | Data Science on AWS | ML Engineering Risk Modeling | Data Science on AWS | ML Engineering 2mo • 2 months ago • Visible to anyone on or off LinkedIn Most credit scorecards use main effects only: one feature, one bin, one WOE value. But what if you could capture feature interactions and still keep a linear, interpretable scorecard? The idea is simple: train a gradient-boosted decision tree (GBDT) model like XGBoost, extract leaf indices from the best trees, treat each leaf as a joint bin, and encode it with WOE. The result feeds into a standard logistic regression alongside your main effects. On the HELOC dataset: XGBoost achieves 88.97% Gini on test. The WOE logistic regression augmented with 12 GBDT trees (as WOE-encoded leaf features) matches it at 88.67%, with 6x less overfitting. hashtag #CreditRiskModeling hashtag #Scorecards hashtag #DataScience hashtag #MachineLearning Your document has finished loading 214 Gabriel Ryan, FRM and 213 others 17 comments 21 reposts Reactions … Like Comment Repost Send Add a comment… Open Emoji Keyboard Current selected sort order is Most relevant Most relevant Andrija Djurovic • 1st Risk Advisory 2mo Very nice Denis Burakov :) I did some research on the same topic, and what I find most challenging is maintaining the monotonicity constraint in a setup where both main effects and interactions are considered. I found that considering only interactions (along with some additional adjustments to the standard tree-based approach) provides a better balance between the common expectation of monotonicity and the overall improvement of the PD model. I implemented these approaches in my PDtoolkit R package. In my opinion, the benefits of this approach extend beyond improvements in discriminatory power. Even though this is usually considered for PD models, I find it even more important for LGD and EAD models, where practitioners often struggle with the risk factor selection process and achieving sufficient discriminatory power. …more Like 5 Reply 1 reply 1 Comment on Andrija Djurovic’s comment Denis Burakov Author Risk Modeling | Data Science on AWS | ML Engineering 2mo Hi Andrija, your approach of interactions-only is an elegant way to sidestep this. I'll check out PDtoolkit, looks like you've thought through this more carefully than the standard tree featurization literature. Like 1 Reply Rafael Matos, MSc. • 1st Credit Risk Modeling | IFRS 9 | Basel | Cost of Credit | Quantitative Finance | Retail Banking | Machine Learning | Data Science | Complex Systems MSc. 2mo Denis Burakov Thanks for sharing. This interesting approach is a variation of the RuleFit algorithm (https://arxiv.org/abs/0811.1679). The R package xrf is an implementation (https://cran.r-project.org/package=xrf). Predictive learning via rule ensembles General regression and classification models are constructed as linear combinations of simple rules derived from the data. Each rule consists of a conjunction of a small number of simple statements concerning the values of individual input variables.... Like 3 Reply 1 reply 1 Comment on Rafael Matos, MSc.’s comment Denis Burakov Author Risk Modeling | Data Science on AWS | ML Engineering 2mo Rafael, yes, very much in the same family, the key difference here is the WOE encoding of leaves rather than binary rule indicators, which gives the scorecard interpretability layer. Will check out xrf! Like 1 Reply Luka Loncar • 2nd Vodeći analitičar za kvantitativno modeliranje 2mo Interesting idea, especially for very large datasets. However, in corporate models it would likely lead to overfitting. Leaf-based bins tend to capture very local patterns and can become unstable over time, which may result in PSI deterioration. I experimented with a similar approach but wasn’t able to use it in practice due to stability issues and the difficulty of maintaining monotonicity across time, as Andrija also mentioned. …more Like 3 Reply 3 replies 3 Replies on Luka Loncar’s comment Denis Burakov Author Risk Modeling | Data Science on AWS | ML Engineering 2mo Luka, true but also true for any tree-based model on smaller datasets. This approach is more for retail portfolios. Regarding bin stability, I can see why this is the case, but generally easier to monitor with this approach that with XGBoost/LightGBM/CatBoost type of model Like 2 Reply Andrija Djurovic • 1st Risk Advisory 2mo Luka Loncar Denis Burakov to a certain extent, I agree with the point about possible overfitting. However, the standard approach to developing decision trees can be adjusted to overcome this problem, or at least to make the tree more robust even with smaller samples. For instance, in my R PDtoolkit package I developed the decision.tree function, which uses a test of two proportions (one- or two-sided, depending on the selected monotonicity constraint in the splitting node) as the splitting criterion, along with several other adjustments to the standard tree-growing process. This does not solve all possible issues in small samples, but it can definitely be considered an improvement compared to standard methods. Additionally, model-based recursive partitioning methods can be considered in a similar way, as they allow the incorporation of other splitting criteria (model-based) within the same decision tree framework. I find all these approaches very interesting and worth investigating :) …more Like 2 Reply Luka Loncar • 2nd Vodeći analitičar za kvantitativno modeliranje 2mo Andrija Djurovic I explored the PDtoolkit package, there are so many gems inside. You cover so many different topics that it will take me years to cover them all. I have read all three books that you have written and they really helped me a lot, for which I am thankful :) Do you have a next book that you plan to write? I would be very much interested in exploring new feature engineering techniques and calibration methods in greater detail. Denis Burakov Looking forward reading over the summer Scoring Foundations in the Age of AI :) …more Like 1 Reply Collapse replies Raymond Anderson • 2nd Credit scoring specialist and author - Rayan Risk Analytics (edited) 2mo Most interactions involve features with the greatest relationship with the target variable. You can also apply a piecewise approach, i.e. have multiple variables per feature/characteristic, to address most interactions. Each feature will have minimum two variables, one each for positive and negative WOEs (monotonicity maintained). Inclusion varies by relevance within the training sample's risk range. I presented a paper at the Edinburgh Credit Scoring Conference about this 10 years ago. https://cer.business-school.ed.ac.uk/wp-content/uploads/sites/55/2017/02/Piecewise-Logistic-Regression-an-Application-in-Credit-Scoring-Raymond-Anderson.pdf Unfortunately, it took a lot of work to figure out how to do the transformations and manage the whole process, but I proved that at least for my example that there were benefits. I used it subsequently, and found that the resulting models, after iterations, made much more sense. …more Like 2 Reply 2 replies 2 Replies on Raymond Anderson’s comment See previous replies Raymond Anderson • 2nd Credit scoring specialist and author - Rayan Risk Analytics 2mo As indicated in the paper, it provided a much more robust model in a situation where risk appetite reduced dramatically. I didn't have the same wealth of data in other situations but, as indicated, I found that the selected variables (pieces) made more sense. One example, was choosing volatility of the balance range for the higher-risk region, but volatility of credit range for lower-risk (I think I remember that correctly). That was a behavioural scoring model. Let me know your results if you do anything with it. …more Like Reply Mohit D. • 2nd Managing Director, Global Head of Consumer Credit Risk Modeling, Quantitative Analytics at Barclays | Credit Risk | AI / ML | Enterprise Risk | Basel, IFRS9, CCAR, CECL, Credit Decision expert | (edited) 2mo What about performance comparison’within’ sample and at the margin? Total gini comparison does not provide much inference in these types of assessments. Similar question on point estimate precision. Like 1 Reply 2 replies 2 Replies on Mohit D.’s comment See previous replies Mohit D. • 2nd Managing Director, Global Head of Consumer Credit Risk Modeling, Quantitative Analytics at Barclays | Credit Risk | AI / ML | Enterprise Risk | Basel, IFRS9, CCAR, CECL, Credit Decision expert | 2mo Denis Burakov very useful. Thank you. Like Reply Alana Zoloeva • 2nd Senior Data Scientist | Quantitative Analyst | FinTech · ML · AI · DS · Optimization · Catboost · Python | UB, HSE graduate | EU work permit (Digital Nomad) 2mo That's an interesting idea to use tree leaves as joint bins and capture interactions while keeping the scorecard interpretable. It’s impressive that the WOE logistic model stays so close to the XGBoost performance! Like 1 Reply Alan Braga Kon • 2nd Sr Data Scientist at Santander | USP MSc Student | Machine Learning | Causal Inference | Econometrics | Data Master Expert 2mo Amazing! Like 1 Reply Richard Knight • 2nd Senior Risk Manager / Men's mental health advocate 2mo Andrea Coimbra, MSc ideas for the next development? Like Reply About Accessibility Help Center Privacy & Terms Ad Choices Advertising Business Services Get the LinkedIn app More LinkedIn Corporation © 2026 Status is online Messaging You are on the messaging overlay. Press enter to open the list of conversations. Compose message You are on the messaging overlay. Press enter to open the list of conversations.
