activity_id: 7454786558127161344
source_url: https://www.linkedin.com/feed/update/urn:li:activity:7454786558127161344/
final_url: https://www.linkedin.com/feed/update/urn:li:activity:7454786558127161344/
title: (3) Post | Feed | LinkedIn
authenticated_surface: True

0 notifications total Skip to search Skip to main content Keyboard shortcuts Close jump menu new feed updates notifications Home 3 3 new network updates notifications My Network Jobs Messaging Notifications Me For Business Reactivate Premium: 50% Off Carlos Vergara Lead Data Scientist | Cloud AI Solutions Architect Bogota, D.C., Capital District EPAM Systems Achieve 4x more profile visits Reactivate Premium: 50% Off Profile viewers 297 Post impressions 403 Feed detail update Feed post Denis Burakov Denis Burakov • 1st Verified • 1st Risk Modeling | Data Science on AWS | ML Engineering Risk Modeling | Data Science on AWS | ML Engineering 3w • 3 weeks ago • Visible to anyone on or off LinkedIn Working on credit risk models, you can discover a whole parallel shelf of metrics typically hidden from mainstream data science. Beyond accuracy, ordinal association measures are a whole different world extending well past the familiar perils of FPR-based AUC and other myths. This collection is a binder of lesser-known papers covering ranking methods, calibration, and performance measures that don't get enough attention. No pun intended, one highlight is the use of Somers' D for LLM reasoning trust. hashtag #Credit hashtag #DataScience hashtag #Collection hashtag #Research hashtag #Metrics Your document has finished loading 262 Eleimon Gonis, PhD and 261 others 9 comments 15 reposts Reactions … Like Comment Repost Send Add a comment… Open Emoji Keyboard Current selected sort order is Most relevant Most relevant Angela B. • 2nd Risk, Data, Models & AI | Governance, Regulation & Strategy | Financial Services Consulting 3w These metrics and plenty more are bread and butter for applied statisticians, so it’s nice to see them getting some air time. It does concern me though how models are being deployed and assessed in this age of “data science” rebranding and development at pace. These methods have been around for decades and are part of a statistician’s core training. But there’s only so much space in a degree programme, and a lot of that depth gets cut to make room for hands-on tooling. The result is that you don’t know what you don’t know. What is the default .fit() actually doing under the hood, and is it appropriate for your use case? Often it isn’t. Not everything should default to Maximum Likelihood Estimation for parameter estimation, or to p = 0.05 as a benchmark. In many applications, a 5% Type I error rate is far from acceptable. It’s not a new problem. I’ve seen it anywhere a point-and-click interface exists for over 20 years, side eye to SPSS. The difference now is scale, speed, and reach. These capabilities are far more accessible, and models are being deployed much faster, often without the depth of statistical insight or oversight that sometimes used to sit around them. Unless we actively upskill data scientists on this, it’s only going to become a bigger issue over time. For me, it’s not about old versus new. It’s recognising that different skillsets matter, and not losing them by focusing on new labels and entry routes without understanding what’s being left behind. It’s about ensuring teams have good coverage of both, either through cross-pollination or cohesive internal training, before that underlying knowledge starts to fade. Because once it does, it’s not just academic. It affects the quality of decisions being made. …more Like 3 Reply 1 reply 1 Comment on Angela B.’s comment Denis Burakov Author Risk Modeling | Data Science on AWS | ML Engineering 3w Angela B. I get your points and agree with everything you’ve said. I also find current data science discourse a bit concerning, especially when it comes to abandoning already established metrics and use something like Brier score etc (will share some of that soon). The problem in my view is that legacy software gets left behind and isn’t used in modern orgs, while Python is too fragmented to offer a comprehensive suite of tools beyond statsmodels that a data scientist can rely on. With the new AI wave, this will probably become even more pronounced. …more Like 2 Reply The Consulting Co. (Global Solutions) LLP 1,979 followers (edited) 2w This is a great deep dive. Accuracy and AUC are often treated as the 'gold standard,' but in high-stakes environments like credit risk, they can be incredibly misleading. Exploring ordinal association and calibration is where the real value lies for long-term model stability. Thanks for highlighting Somers' D—especially its application in LLM reasoning trust! Like 1 Reply Caio Guimaraes • 3rd+ Financial and Risk Consultant @ EY 3w Awesome! Like 1 Reply Joe Kurian • 2nd Credit Risk Strategy| Lending Innovation |ML, LLMs| Data, Model Governance & Regulatory Compliance 3w Good collection Denis Burakov. Thanks for binding them. Like 1 Reply Abdul A. • 2nd Strategist | Skeptical Empiricist | Pragmatist 3w Denis Burakov I save this kind of post. Thank you for sharing Like 1 Reply Lucas Leão • 2nd Data Scientist | Conformal Prediction | Anomaly Detection | Natural Language Processing | Forecasting | Machine Learning 3w João Maia Like 1 Reply Richard Knight • 2nd Senior Risk Manager / Men's mental health advocate 3w Andrea Coimbra, MSc Like Reply Oleg Evdokimov • 2nd Chief Executive Officer 2w Thank you for sharing 🙏 Like Reply About Accessibility Help Center Privacy & Terms Ad Choices Advertising Business Services Get the LinkedIn app More LinkedIn Corporation © 2026 Status is online Messaging You are on the messaging overlay. Press enter to open the list of conversations. Compose message You are on the messaging overlay. Press enter to open the list of conversations.
