                        Piecewise Logistic Regression:
                       an Application in Credit Scoring

                               by Raymond Anderson
                           Standard Bank of South Africa

                                   Presented at
                   Credit Scoring and Control Conference XIV
                          Edinburgh, 26-28 August 2015


                                         Abstract

Piecewise regression (also known as “segmented” or “broken-stick” regression) is typically
associated with linear regression, and the modelling of a non-linear relationship between a
single dependent variable and an independent variable (both continuous). The dependent
variable is partitioned into intervals, each of which is introduced as separate variable into a
model. It has seldom been used in credit scoring, where the most common approach is use
logistic regression to model a binary outcome, with the many predictors (both continuous
and categorical) transformed into “weights of evidence” for different ranges/ groups.

This paper presents the results of an attempt at using piecewise logistic regression to
develop a credit scoring model. The idea came about from an attempt to combine weights
of evidence and 0/1 dummy variables in a single regression, as the use of dummies often
results in values that do not make sense, necessitating manual and time-consuming
adjustments. Weights of evidence were then used for both dummies and non-dummies,
and piecewise regression became a logical next step.

1 Executive Summary
  “There are two types of people in this world - those who can remain focussed, and those
                       who… Hey look, a squirrel!” Unattributed

During initial attempts at using piecewise logistic regression the concept was discussed with
a colleague. He commented that, and this is paraphrased, “The industry is generally divided
into WOE (‘Weight of Evidence’) users and raw dummy users, yet you’ve gone straight to a
third way.” Well, what is being proposed is not a “third way”, but a “middle way”. It uses
the same numbers calculated for the WOE approach, but rather than transforming the
characteristics into a single variable, they are transformed into multiple variables as defined
by the scorecard developer.

The end result is an approach that potentially, could provide better results than both the
WOE and dummy approaches, even though it is a middle way. One typically assumes that
such a path will provide results somewhere between the starting two options, but in this
instance the results seem to be better than both.
2 Introduction
2.1 Background

Computers have allowed companies to compile huge masses of data—details of customers
at every stage of their life cycle. Records exist per customer and/or account, with their
“characteristics” at one or more points in time, e.g. credit applications, month-end balance
and transaction details, collections statuses. In credit scoring, these records are tied to later
outcomes. Did the customer pay or not? Was the application accepted or rejected?
Basically, was there a beneficial outcome… or not? In some fields, such as medicine, the
cases are referred to as “positive” (detrimental, as in HIV positive) and “negative”
(beneficial, or at least not detrimental). For credit risk, these are typically called “bad” and
“good” respectively.

In any event, the assignation of these outcome statuses provides us with the feedstock
required for predictive modelling, both predictors (observations) and performance
(outcomes). If it can be assumed that the future will be like the past, then historical data
can be used to provide an estimation of the future. These are heuristic models (as opposed
to deterministic), that can only provide guesses—not absolute answers.

This data is typically not well suited for analysis though, and techniques will be used to
“transform” (or “normalise”) the characteristics into variables that allow us to create the
best possible model. In many academic and other environments the limited number of
observations restricts the choice of transformation methodologies to log functions, square
roots, dummies, and multiplicative inverse, amongst others.

In contrast, credit scoring—at least for most retail applications—is data rich, which enables
the use of user-defined groupings of each characteristic as part of the transformation, and
the derivation of “points” values for each group that make the models easier to understand.
First, a “fine” classing is done that takes little (or less) cognisance of the underlying patterns
within the data; and then a “coarse” classing, that considers the underlying patterns to
make sure that the resulting model makes logical sense relative to the data. Once
complete, the data can be transformed using various methodologies.

2.2 Data-rich transformation methodologies

For binary good/bad outcomes, the transformation methodology typically varies depending
upon the type of statistical technique being used: a) weights of evidence for logistic
regression, which closely matches the objective function being modelled (i.e. the natural log
of the good/bad odds); and b) dummy variables for linear probability modelling (LPM),
where the objective function is the binary “Good=0/Bad=1” outcome (note, that LPM is a
variation of linear regression where there are only two possible outcomes, as opposed to a
range).

Representations of the two functions are provided in Equation 1 and Equation 2. The
equations to the left are effectively the same, but “x” will have the WoE and dummies
respectively, while the values for “b” will be derived by the regression.



Piecewise logistic regression - an application in credit scoring                          Page 2
Equation 1. Logistic regression                    p(Good ) 
                                              ln                 b0  b1 x1  b2 x 2    bk x k  e
                                                   1  p(Good ) 

Equation 2. Linear probability modelling                P(Good )  b0   b j x j  e
                                                                                j 1

Where:
b0 = constant;
bj = beta coefficients;
xj = transformed variable, WoE or dummy;
j = variable number/indicator;
e = error term;

The concept of “dummy variables” is conceptually easy, a value of 0 or 1 indicates the
presence or absence of some feature, i.e. does the characteristic have a value within the
range or set (a “class”) of those specified (this applies to both predictor and performance
variables). In contrast, weights of evidence are calculated based upon what has been
observed within the model development data, as per Equation 3:

                                                                  Bad                   Good  
Equation 3. Weight of evidence                          WoE  Ln                               
                                                                   Bad                  Good  
                                                                                               

The numerators for each of the two ratios are counts for the class, while the denominators
are the total counts for the sample. The resulting value closely aligns with the objective
function in Equation 1… hence its suitability to the task.

2.3 Piecewise logistic

In the current instance, we are looking solely at logistic regression. Although the typical
uses of WOE and dummies have been presented above, they can be and are used in
combination in logistic regression. It is only the variable “x” values that change depending
upon how the variable has been transformed.

There are three cases that we will be comparing in this paper, all of which use the weights of
evidence:
    1) Base Case, which refers to the standard approach for logistic regression, with one
       variable per characteristic (Equation 4);
    2) Piecewise, where there may be one or more variables (pieces) for the characteristic,
       where each “piece” may represent one or more coarse classes (Equation 5);
    3) Dummy, where there is a separate variable (piece) for each coarse class, each
       containing the weight of evidence if the characteristic is within the group, and zero if
       not (Equation 6).




Piecewise logistic regression - an application in credit scoring                                         Page 3
                                   p(Good ) 
Equation 4. Basecase Logistic ln                 b0   b j x j  e
                                   1  p(Good )          j 1


Equation 5. Piecewise Logistic                            b0         b x      j ,k
                                                                   j 1, k 1,l 1
                                                                                        j , k ,l   e


Equation 6. Dummy Logistic                                b0   b j ,l ,1 x j ,k ,1  e
                                                                   j 1,k 1


Where: j = characteristic number/indicator; k = piece number within characteristic; and l =
class number within the piece;

For the dummy case, Equation 6, the “1” subscript for “b” and “x” indicates that there will
only ever be one coarse class per piece.

Note, that the use of Weights of Evidence for the Dummy approach here may be confusing.
The reason for doing so was to speed up the analysis, as it was assumed that in this instance
the use of 0/1 and WOEs would give (substantially) the same result, i.e. if adjustments are
made in both instances to ensure that the final model makes logical sense—removing
variables where the final points value is counterintuitive (e.g. negative instead of positive for
a better than average risk category). Failure to do so results in over-fitting to the dataset.
The task of creating a parsimonious model when using WOEs is relatively easy—just ensure
that the final beta coefficients for each variable are positive, as the WOEs already indicate
the relative risk. This is more difficult and manually intensive for 0/1 values (unless one uses
minus one for cases with negative WOEs).


3 Data origin and preparation

The dataset in question was for an abnormally high-risk portfolio, where risk appetite had
been reined in substantially over the period under consideration. Figure 1 shows an initial
ramp up in taken-up volumes as the product was first offered, peaking in 2012H1 before
being substantially curtailed, while Figure 2 shows the significant shift in risk profile after
the peak (one can see the implementation of the “old score” in the 2013H2 distribution).
More recently the profile has been stable.

Figure 1 – Take Up Volumes                       Figure 2 – Risk Distribution




Piecewise logistic regression - an application in credit scoring                                        Page 4
Application volumes were so high that a development sample could be created using the
data from a single half-year (2012H2), with out-of-time samples from each of the following
two half-years (2013H1 and 2013H2). A decision had been taken NOT to do any reject
inference, as reject performance had effectively been “bought” over the period in the
development sample.

Further support for the decision is provided by Figure 3, which shows a comparison of the
risk profile between the development sample and a very recent sample (no performance
available) based on an existing score. For the development sample, the “accept” and
“good” distributions are shown, as opposed to the “through-the-door” and “accept”
distributions for the recent sample. From this, it can be seen that the accepted cases in the
development sample more than adequately represent the more recent rejects.

Figure 3 – Development vs. Recent




Initial data rationalisation included the removal of any characteristics that were deemed
weak, in terms of predictive power, the benchmark for exclusion being any information
value (Kullback divergence statistic) less than 0.02. Thereafter, further rationalisation was
done by reviewing the predictive power and patterns across coarse classes over time, and
excluding any where: a) there were substantial reductions in predictive power, and/or b)
there were substantial changes in the patterns—which usually went hand in hand. For
some characteristics, there were massive changes in the population stability index, but the
characteristic became more predictive because some of the classes became rarer and more
meaningful.

Prior to the piecewise approach being attempted the data had already been coarse classed.
The piecewise logistic approach was stumbled upon accidentally while trying to
accommodate dummy variables in an otherwise straightforward logistic regression. Each of
the original coarse classes was assigned to a “piece” for the piecewise regression. At first,
separate files were created for each option with their own classing, but every time the files
were reviewed small changes were made (sometimes typos), which might have hampered
like-for-like comparison across the three approaches. As a result, it was decided to: a)
create the classing file based on the Piecewise approach; and then programmatically b)




Piecewise logistic regression - an application in credit scoring                      Page 5
remove the piece allocations for the Base Case approach; and c) assign each coarse class to
its own “piece” for the Dummy approach.


4 Results

This journey was started using and accepted an approved approach—the use of stepwise
logistic regression using weights of evidence, with a 5% entry/exit criterion and further
characteristic reduction by restricting the number of stepped characteristics to those that
continue to add lift. As attempts were made to assess the impact of using a Piecewise
approach, it became necessary to test other possibilities to ensure the results were
consistent. Thus, nine models were developed along three dimensions:
    1) Transformation type:
            a. Base case, using one variable per characteristic;
            b. Piecewise, using multiple user-defined variables per characteristic;
            c. Dummy, using multiple variables per characteristic, one per coarse class.
    2) Regression type:
            a. Positive/negative, the normal stepwise logistic results;
            b. Positive only, which removed any variables with negative beta coefficients;
                and
            c. Limited, where the number of variables is limited to further avoid overfitting;
    3) Time:
            a. Development, second half of 2012;
            b. First out-of-time, first half of 2013; and
            c. Second out-of-time, second half of 2013.

The testing of the different “regression types” may seem odd, but there was a risk that the
results were being affected by steps taken to avoid over-fitting.

The results from each were then compared using a standard measure of models’ predictive
power, the Gini coefficient. Further, a brief review of correlations and variance inflation
factors (VIF) was done, as was a review of the resulting models’ complexity.


4.1 Gini coefficients

The Gini coefficients for each of the nine scorecards are provided in Table 1 and Figure 4. It
was initially thought that the results for the Piecewise approach—given that it is the middle
path—would lie somewhere in between the other two. This is not the case! Instead, the
Piecewise approach is almost always better, the exception being the Limited option on the
development sample. The improvement is not huge, but consistent and not insignificant in
relative terms. Further, it is (surprisingly) quite a bit better on the out-of-time samples.

If the results are correct, then the relationship between the number of variables used to
represent the characteristics and the resulting Gini must be curvilinear, the shape of the
curve depending upon the manner in which the “breakup” of characteristics into variables is
done. If done randomly, then it is well possible that each of the intermediate points would
lie between the Base Case and Dummy results. If, however, done systematically—first into


Piecewise logistic regression - an application in credit scoring                       Page 6
logical pieces and then into even finer pieces as has been done—the apex lies somewhere
at, or near, the point where every piece represents a logical grouping of the WOEs.


   Table 1 - Gini coefficients and lift
                               Gini Coefficients         Absolute lift        Relative lift
                           Base     Piece-             Piece-              Piece-
   Sample     Reg Type     Case      wise     Dummy     wise    Dummy       wise      Dummy
   Dev        Beta +/-     48.4%     49.4%     48.8%     1.0%      0.4%       2.0%        0.9%
              Beta Pos     48.2%     49.1%     48.3%     0.8%      0.1%       1.7%        0.1%
              Limited      47.7%     48.1%     48.3%     0.4%      0.5%       0.9%        1.1%
   OoT1       Beta +/-     42.9%     43.4%     42.9%     0.5%      0.0%       1.2%        0.0%
              Beta Pos     42.5%     43.3%     42.9%     0.7%      0.4%       1.7%        0.8%
              Limited      42.3%     43.0%     42.5%     0.7%      0.2%       1.6%        0.4%
   OoT2       Beta +/-     38.8%     39.9%     38.8%     1.2%      0.0%       3.0%        0.1%
              Beta Pos     38.2%     39.7%     39.0%     1.4%      0.8%       3.8%        2.0%
              Limited      37.3%     38.9%     38.4%     1.6%      1.1%       4.4%        3.0%

Figure 4 – Gini coefficients




An exercise was done to test this hypothesis. In order to speed up the process, the
characteristics used for the exercise were limited to those that had featured in any one of
the “Limited” (or Stepped) models, which was a subset of 25 out of a total of 69. Two series
of runs were then done, using Piecewise as a starting point, adjusting each of the
characteristics in alphabetical order: 1) to have a single variable per characteristic; and 2) to
have one variable per course class. The end points for each would be the Base Case and
Dummy approaches, respectively (in Figure 5 working from the inside out). All runs were
done ensuring the weights of evidence were positive (Beta Pos). The results were then
reordered to show the progression as one moved from the Base Case to Piecewise to
Dummy.




Piecewise logistic regression - an application in credit scoring                          Page 7
Figure 5 – Absolute Gini lift




A graph of the absolute lift (or reduction) as each characteristic was modified is shown in
Figure 5. Although the curvilinear relationship is plainly evident to the naked eye, it is very
jagged, especially as it gets close to being a full dummy model. The curve is least evident for
the development dataset (especially as it approaches the dummy model), but very prevalent
in both out-of-time samples. Interestingly, the second out-of-time sample gets the greatest
lift across the board. Further, it seems that the results are best for the second out-of-time
sample, which also happens to be off the lowest base (relative lift would be even more
exaggerated).

The question then arises as to “Why?” The explanation probably comes in two parts: a) the
shift from the Base Case to Piecewise; and then b) Piecewise to Dummy. For Base Case to
Piecewise, the most likely explanation is that the Piecewise approach better reflects the
non-linear relationships within the data, resulting in a better explanatory model. For
example, the Piecewise model gave greater weight to “Time with Bank” for newer
customers, but this shifted to “Age of Applicant”, “Time at Employment”, and “Time at
Address” for older customers. For bureau data, the tendency was to give positive points for
the lack of any negative performance, but negative points for a lack of credit experience and
recent credit appetite (new facilities or enquiries).

Trying to explain the next move is more difficult. It seems that as the number of “pieces”
used to represent the variables increases, the regression function puts greater emphasis on
those representing the tails of each characteristic, especially the higher-risk end, and less on
the middle range. This leaves the centre of the distribution under-represented, which
becomes especially problematic when there are the huge population shifts that we have
seen within this population— the power that was invested in one tail is lost. This has not
been proved, and may be an area for further research.

Correlations and variance inflation factors (VIFs) are typically reviewed to minimise over-
fitting, and guard against overlapping information in the model. These values have been
calculated only for the “Limited” regression:
     1) Base case – had the highest values for both. The maximum correlation was 59%,
         while two variables had VIFs over 5.0 (the latter indicating a significant overlap);
     2) Piecewise – The maximum correlation was 55%, i.e. for unrelated pieces. The
         maximum VIF was 2.05 for the included variables;


Piecewise logistic regression - an application in credit scoring                          Page 8
   3) Dummy – The maximum correlation was 47%, and the maximum VIF was 2.40 for the
        included variables.
Thus, it would appear that both the Piecewise and Dummy approaches both aid in the
process of addressing correlations and variance inflation.


4.2 Resulting model complexity

Something that is seldom considered when reviewing credit scoring models is the models’
complexity, yet this is very important in business settings both for ease of interpretation and
implementation. In this instance, model complexity has been summarised in terms of the
number of: 1) characteristics, or data elements, used; 2) variables, used as predictors in the
model; and 3) attributes, being the ranges and associated points. There is one variable per
characteristic for the Base Case, and one variable per attribute (coarse class) for the Dummy
approach, but the counts differ for each for Piecewise.

Figure 6 – Number of Characteristics, Variables, and Attributes




The numbers are represented in Figure 6. As the regression approach changed, i.e.
removing negative betas and limiting the number of steps limited, all values reduced.
However, as the transformation approach changed—moving from the Base Case to
Piecewise to Dummy—the number of attributes reduced (107/78/40) and the number of
variables increased (23/36/40), while the number of characteristics went up and down
(23/29/25). The numbers in parentheses are for the “Beta Pos” models only.

A manual review of the different models indicated that the Piecewise scorecard was the
easiest to interpret (albeit where multiple pieces appeared for the same characteristic, the
beta coefficients had to be reviewed to determine where the emphasis was being laid).
Interpretation of the Base Case model was complicated by the large number of attributes,
and the Dummy model by it including more characteristics and values that sometimes did
not make sense (e.g. floaters in some middle range). Granted, the same may not apply to a


Piecewise logistic regression - an application in credit scoring                        Page 9
different development or dataset. Even so, this may provide anecdotal proof of Einstein’s
quote, “Everything should be as simple as possible, but no simpler” (which aligns closely
with the concept of Occam’s razor, whereby the simplest of all possible solutions is most
likely to be the correct one). The Dummy approach seemingly results in a result that is too
simple—at least if measured that by the number of attributes featuring in the model (only
40 in this case).

4.3 Caveats

Although the results of this analysis are promising in terms of allowing scorecard developers
to build more predictive and parsimonious models, there are certain caveats. First, the task
of assigning coarse classes to pieces required some getting used to. And second, the data
available for this analysis was peculiar in terms of its size and shifts over time, making the
results difficult to replicate.

4.3.1 Piece assignment

A key factor for the Piecewise approach is how the coarse classes were assigned to pieces.
The computer code required to create the different pieces had to be put in place, and then
some framework for assigning coarse classes to pieces.

It took some time to determine that best way to make the piece assignments. The starting
point was to break each characteristic into two pieces, one for negative and one for positive
WOEs, to ensure that the final points/WOE relationship is maintained (initial attempts used
a combination of Base Case and Piecewise variables, but best results were achieved only
once all characteristics had been split into pieces). Further, if there were discontinuities for
any of the coarse classes with significant volumes, they were assigned to another
piece. This usually applied to values at the extremities, e.g. 0—which can mean either
“zero” or “missing”)—and, for percentage characteristics, 100 (or 99 if only two digits
allowed).

Interestingly, for the percentage characteristics in the dataset only “zero” values got points
(negative for the “percentage 0 arrears L24M”=0, and positive of the “percentage 2
arrears”=0). Another case for a separate “piece”, could be where the WoEs cluster around
zero (i.e. average risk for the sample, which would require that the coarse classing be
different, as there has to be a one to many relationship between the pieces and coarse
classes).

At the same time, there is a need to guard against having pieces representing very small
groups. One of the more powerful characteristics related to the delinquency on an account
of another type already in place, but only 25 percent of cases had that account. When
broken up finely, only the “missing” piece featured, but once the “non-missing” values were
presented as a single piece, that (the desired) piece came into the model. Obviously, having
pieces representing very small groups can be problematic.




Piecewise logistic regression - an application in credit scoring                       Page 10
4.3.2 Data

The data used for this development was only taken up accounts for an originations
scorecard, and did not include any reject inference. Had inference been done, the results
for the high-risk tail would have been even more heavily influenced by the inference than
normal. That said, the same would apply if any risk based segmentation had been
performed.

Further, it is unusual to have the ability to eliminate characteristics that show changes in
predictive power over time—as has been the case here. While benefits have already been
shown on the development sample, it is possible that the benefits on the out-of-time
samples have been exaggerated as a result. In particular, it was noted in Figure 2 how the
accept population had been affected by the old scorecard cut-off in the second out-of-time
sample, which implies that greater emphasis is being put onto the lower risk end of the
attributes.


5 Conclusion

The results of this analysis indicate that better credit scoring models can be built using
piecewise logistic regression than the same regression using a single variable per
characteristic (Base Case) or attribute (Dummy). The Gini coefficients are higher, while the
correlations and variance inflation factors are lower. At the same time, the models are
more robust, being better able to handle a changing risk environment.

This is not to say that this approach should be used for every scorecard development going
forward, but that it should at least be part of the available tools. This analysis was blessed
with a unique set of data that was not only rich, but afforded two out-of-time samples
where there had been significant changes to the portfolio. Results may not be as good
where data is thin, or—at least for out-of-time—where the environment is more stable.

That said, there are caveats associated with the approach. Some means needs to be derived
and experience gained regarding how to assign the various coarse classes to “pieces”. The
most obvious approach is to have separate variables for coarse classes with positive and
negative WOEs (lower versus higher risk), and further variables for the outlying values (e.g.
0 or high/low range) where the risk pattern was discontinuous also helped. Care must be
taken though, as failure to have sufficient cases included in a piece may prevent it from
entering the model, no matter how powerful it is.

None of what has been presented in this paper is rocket science. The proposed approach is
a simple combination of two known and accepted transformation methodologies that
appears to provide better results than either. At the same time, and perhaps more
importantly, it provides scorecard developers with the ability to develop scorecards that are
easier to interpret, explain to end users—and provide greater insights into the portfolios
they are meant to explain.




Piecewise logistic regression - an application in credit scoring                     Page 11
