                                                    On (assessing) the fairness of risk score models
                                             Eike Petersen1,, 2, * Melanie Ganz2,, 3, 4 Sune Hannibal Holm2,, 5 and Aasa Feragen1, 2
                                                                         1
                                                                            Technical University of Denmark, DTU Compute
                                                                                    2
                                                                                      Pioneer Centre for AI, Denmark
                                                               3
                                                                 University of Copenhagen, Department of Computer Science, Denmark
                                                                 4
                                                                   Neurobiology Research Unit, Rigshospitalet, Copenhagen, Denmark
                                                         5
                                                           University of Copenhagen, Department of Food and Resource Economics, Denmark
                                                                            *
                                                                              Corresponding author. Contact: ewipe@dtu.dk.
arXiv:2302.08851v2 [cs.LG] 22 Feb 2023




                                                                                             Abstract
                                                   Recent work on algorithmic fairness has largely focused on the fairness of discrete decisions, or
                                               classifications. While such decisions are often based on risk score models, the fairness of the risk
                                               models themselves has received considerably less attention. Risk models are of interest for a number
                                               of reasons, including the fact that they communicate uncertainty about the potential outcomes to users,
                                               thus representing a way to enable meaningful human oversight. Here, we address fairness desiderata
                                               for risk score models. We identify the provision of similar epistemic value to different groups as a
                                               key desideratum for risk score fairness. Further, we address how to assess the fairness of risk score
                                               models quantitatively, including a discussion of metric choices and meaningful statistical comparisons
                                               between groups. In this context, we also introduce a novel calibration error metric that is less sample
                                               size-biased than previously proposed metrics, enabling meaningful comparisons between groups of
                                               different sizes. We illustrate our methodology – which is widely applicable in many other settings – in
                                               two case studies, one in recidivism risk prediction, and one in risk of major depressive disorder (MDD)
                                               prediction.


                                         1    Introduction
                                         To date, much of the algorithmic fairness literature has focused on the fairness of classification systems
                                         which are used, for example, to decide whether a person should be granted a loan or be released from
                                         prison on bail. Even in cases where such classification decisions are based on risk score models – such
                                         as in the highly influential COMPAS case [5, 11, 16] – their fairness is typically considered a function
                                         of the decisions, or classifications, made by the system. Of course, any risk score model can be turned
                                         into a classifier by selecting a probability threshold (in binary classification) or predicting the most likely
                                         outcome (in multi-class classification). Nevertheless, we argue here that it is worthwhile to distinguish
                                         between these two settings and consider the fairness of risk models independent of their downstream
                                         use, be it as the basis for a classifier or otherwise. We discuss notions of fairness for risk scores as well
                                         as their relationship to classical, classification-level notions of fairness, and we develop robust tools to
                                         empirically quantify risk score fairness. We illustrate our methodology in two case studies, one situated
                                         in the criminal justice system and one in healthcare.

                                         Why distinguish between fair models and fair decisions?
                                         In the statistical literature, it is generally considered desirable to distinguish between inference (e.g.,
                                         identifying a risk score model) and subsequent decision-making (e.g., deriving a classification from a
                                         risk score model): while the former represents a purely statistical task, the latter depends on subjective



                                                                                                 1
Petersen et al.                                            On (assessing) the fairness of risk score models


choices about the relative desirability of different outcomes [39, 78]. Similar arguments have been made
in the context of fairness analyses: learning a fair prediction model and making fair decisions based on
a model are two separate tasks that should be considered separately [35]. At the same time, risk score
models also play an important role outside the realm of automated decision-making, as a tool for human-
computer interaction. Risk scores communicate uncertainty about the potential outcomes to users, thus
enabling meaningful human oversight and decision-making as required for high-risk AI applications,
e.g., by the EU’s proposed AI Act [17]. For this reason, risk scores have a long and successful history in
fields such as medicine [44, 50, 67, 70, 77, 98], lending further urgency to an analysis of their fairness
outside the realm of automated classification systems.

Contributions.
Our contributions range from the conceptual to the technical level, motivated by a single question:
                  How can we define and reliably quantify the fairness of risk score models?
In particular, our contributions include the following:
   1. We provide a principled argument for equality of epistemic value provided to different groups as a
      key desideratum for the fairness of risk models (section 3). By epistemic value, we here refer to the
      utility of the model in predicting the true risks of subjects. From this, we derive the relevance of
      previously proposed metrics, such as calibration, as well as new ones, for the fairness of risk scores.
      In particular, we argue that calibration and discriminative ability, that is, how well a model is able
      to separate positive from negative examples, are two complimentary key properties of interest.
      The latter can be measured, for example, by the area under the receiver-operating characteristic
      curve (AUROC) or the area under the precision-recall-gain curve (AUPRG).
   2. We examine whether risk score models can be used to obtain fair rankings in, e.g., scarce resource
      allocation scenarios such as medical triage (section 4). We show how even otherwise fair risk
      score models can lead to unfair rankings, and we show how ranking fairness relates naturally to
      demographic parity, or independence, in classification models. Following this analysis, we discuss
      consequences and make recommendations for the use of risk score models in resource allocation
      and prioritization.
   3. We address the quantification of potential fairness violations in practice (section 5). In this context,
      we discuss the importance of metric uncertainty quantification in order to avoid premature con-
      clusions regarding the fairness or unfairness of a model. In addition, we introduce a novel calibra-
      tion error metric that is more reliable and less sample size-biased than existing, commonly used
      metrics. The latter property is of particular relevance in the fairness context, where groups of dif-
      ferent sizes are frequently compared.
   4. We illustrate our methodology – which is widely applicable – using two case studies, one in juvenile
      recidivism risk prediction, and one in risk of major depressive disorder (MDD) prediction (section 6).
      While the first case study uses a previously published and analyzed dataset [85], the second case
      study, based on national registry data of more than 400,000 subjects, is completely new.

Notation and problem setting
We consider the fairness of a risk score 𝑅 ∈ [0, 1] computed by a model 𝑓 (𝑋 ) from input features 𝑋 . We
make no assumptions about 𝑓 – it could be, for example, a simple linear model, a neural network, or a
random forest model. A risk score is designed to approximate the true risk 𝜌 = 𝑃(𝑌 = 1 ∣ 𝑋 ) of an outcome
𝑌 ∈ {0, 1} being positive (𝑌 = 1), given the input features 𝑋 . We refer to this as the fundamental aim of
risk modeling. In some places, we will consider binary predictions 𝑌̂ ∈ {0, 1} derived from risk scores 𝑅
by means of a decision threshold 𝜏 ∈ [0, 1]. We pursue a notion of group fairness, comparing model



                                                      2
Petersen et al.                                                           On (assessing) the fairness of risk score models


properties between subject groups 𝐺 derived from protected attributes 𝑋𝑝 . The protected attributes may
or may not be partially or fully contained in the model inputs 𝑋 . We consider categorical groups only;
continuous-valued sensitive attributes (such as age) are discretized into a set of bins. Groups of interest
may be defined by one or more sensitive attributes, and groups may overlap.


2      Background and related work
While the fairness of risk models has been widely discussed in the literature, this has been predominantly
done in the context of risk scores used for automated decision-making, i.e., discrete classifications derived
from risk scores based on a fixed threshold [11, 23, 34, 41, 45, 75, 89]. As a consequence, many of the
proposed standard fairness metrics such as equalized odds, equal opportunity, parity of predictive values,
or net benefit, are a function of classification decisions, and not of the risk score itself [34, 75]. This can
be problematic for a number of reasons. First, decision thresholds might not be known in advance or
might vary over time, thus inducing a need for an assessment that considers a whole range of possible
thresholds. Second, any such classification-based fairness metric is based on implicit assumptions about
the relative costs and benefits of different true or false decisions, which might not be known in advance.
Third, separating between the aim of learning a fair model and making just decisions enables a more
precise investigation into the sources of potential unfairness [35]. And, finally, there might simply be no
formal decision-making process to analyze, for example in cases in which risk scores are used to inform
human decision-making.
    There is one notable exception to this focus on the fairness of classifications in the context of risk
scores: calibration by groups, which is one of the standard fairness metrics employed in this space [6,
11, 46], is indeed a risk score-level metric that is fully independent of any subsequent decision-making.
Calibration by groups is defined as [6]

                                             𝑃(𝑌 = 1 ∣ 𝑅 = 𝑟, 𝐺 = 𝑔) = 𝑟            ∀ 𝑟, 𝑔.                                           (1)

In words, the model’s risk predictions should correspond to the actual risk in the population – a property
of central importance to the project of risk modeling. Calibration as a desirable property of probabilistic
models has a long history in diverse fields [35, 71, 86]. Many different metrics have been proposed
for assessing calibration performance, including the expected calibration error (ECE) [65], adaptive
calibration error (ACE) [66], and various metrics based on proper scoring rule decompositions [9, 14, 15,
64]. Unfortunately, it has been noted that standard calibration error estimates suffer from severe sample
size bias [8, 32, 49, 79], thus necessitating the development of less biased alternative metrics. Towards
this end, Kumar et al. [49] proposed a binned version of the bias-corrected Brier score decomposition
described by Ferro and Fricker [18], corresponding to a debiased estimate of the root mean squared
calibration error. They used equal-width binning and a fixed number 𝑁𝐵 of 15 bins. Later, Roelofs et al.
[79] found that bias could be further reduced by using equal-mass binning. In addition, Roelofs et al.
[79] describe a variant of ACE in which they choose the number 𝑁𝐵 of bins adaptively as the highest
bin number that still yields a monotonically increasing calibration curve. They find this method to
perform similarly well compared to an equal-mass binning version of the debiased calibration RMSE
described by Kumar et al. [49]. Interestingly, however, Roelofs et al. [79] do not apply their proposed bin
count search method to the metric described by Kumar et al. [49]. Moreover, to the authors’ knowledge,
the implications of sample size-biased calibration error metrics for fairness analyses have not yet been
discussed. In the fairness context, such biases are especially problematic, as groups of different sizes are
routinely compared.
    In the context of predictive modeling, calibration is often considered in conjunction with a second
desirable property, discriminative ability [84]. 1 Maybe most prominently, discriminative ability can

   1 This property has been the subject of many definitions across fields, including refinement [13, 48], sharpness [28], separation [22],

and resolution [64], all of which describe very closely related and, in many cases, identical concepts.




                                                                    3
Petersen et al.                                                    On (assessing) the fairness of risk score models


be measured by the area under the receiver-operating characteristic curve (AUROC) [4, 19, 20]. The
AUROC metric is of particular relevance in our setting as it does not rely on binary classification decisions,
quantifying the accuracy of the score ranking instead. This can also be understood from its equivalence
to the concordance statistic [33, 84], i.e., the likelihood of a randomly selected positive sample being
ranked above a randomly selected negative sample. 2 It has been noted that in the case of strong class
imbalance, AUROC can be misleading [81], and in such cases, the area under the precision-recall curve,
equivalent to the average precision (AP), has been proposed as a potential alternative metric [57, 81].
As has been pointed out by Flach and Kull [21], this metric requires proper normalization in order
to enable meaningful comparisons between groups with different base rates, resulting in the use of
precision-recall-gain curves and the area below them (AUPRG).
     Finally, fair ranking has also been the subject of many publications, including rankings derived
from risk score models; for an overview refer to the recent survey of Zehlike et al. [94]. Much of this
research is in recommendation systems, however, in which relative position in a ranking matters due to
declining attention being given to lower ranks [95]. This differs importantly from the set selection setting
we consider here, in which relative position is irrelevant as long as a subject is selected for inclusion.
Set selection fairness is intimately tied to ROC curve analysis, as both depend on the distributions of
risk predictions in different groups. Vogel et al. [87] describe a general ROC-based framework for fair
ranking, which subsumes different variations of AUROC fairness, as well as pointwise ROC fairness,
corresponding to the requirement that, e.g., at every threshold in a given range, true and/or false positive
rates should be equal across groups. Zehlike et al. [96] propose a fair top-k ranking algorithm for
overlapping protected groups, which ensures a certain minimum representation of each group in the
selected set while maximizing overall ranking utility. The relationship between such approaches and
(fair) risk score-based set selection has not analyzed, however.


3      Fairness desiderata for risk score models
What should we ask of a “fair” risk score model? Recall that the fundamental aim of risk modeling is
to accurately predict the true underlying risks. If we consider the fairness of a risk model detached
from any subsequent decision-making, then we can only characterize its fairness in terms of how well
it performs according to this aim in different groups. We thus argue here that the fairness of a risk
model is fundamentally determined by the epistemic value it provides to the different groups, and we
consider a risk score model fair if it provides similar epistemic value to all groups of interest. This differs
fundamentally from the classification case, in which fairness is typically characterized in terms of the
relative costs or benefits provided to different groups as a result of decisions made based on the model,
such as in equalized odds [34], equality of opportunity [34], or the expected net benefit of an intervention
for different groups [75].
     Quantifying the epistemic value of a given model or belief has been the subject of intense research
and debate for many decades across disciplines. Interestingly, many of these diverse strands of research
converge on calibration as a key desirable property of a model from an epistemic point of view [35, 71, 86].
In practice, calibration will never be satisfied exactly, and much research has been devoted to assessing
the degree to which a model is miscalibrated; refer to section 2 and section 5.2.1 for more details on this
issue. For now, we simply state that we consider similar degrees of (mis-)calibration across groups our
first fairness desideratum for risk score models.
     However, a calibrated model need not be epistemically valuable. A model that always returns a
group’s base rate 𝑃(𝑌 = 1 ∣ 𝐺), regardless of any input features 𝑋 , is perfectly calibrated but provides
little epistemic value. Thus, it has long been known that a secondary requirement for a model to provide
epistemic value is for it to successfully separate positive from negative examples. We will employ the

    2 Another related result is the equivalence between AUROC and the Mann-Whitney U statistic [59].




                                                              4
Petersen et al.                                                       On (assessing) the fairness of risk score models


term discriminative ability 3 to characterize this property, and we consider similar degrees of discriminative
ability across groups to be our second fairness desideratum for risk score models. We will return to the
issue of specific metrics in section 5 but would like to make two general remarks here.

Calibration and discriminative ability are fully orthogonal properties.
A model can be perfectly calibrated yet have no discriminative ability, as mentioned above. The inverse
is also true: Consider a model that always returns 0.5 − 𝜀 for negative examples and 0.5 + 𝜀 for positive
examples – such a model would be maximally miscalibrated while being perfectly discriminative. We
will want our chosen metrics to reflect this orthogonality, i.e., a calibration metric should be independent
of discriminative ability, and vice versa. As a negative example, it is well-known that proper scoring
rules such as the Brier score and the log loss measure a combination of calibration and discriminative
ability [48], thus being unsuitable for use as a pure measure of either property. As a positive example,
the AUROC metric conforms with this requirement, since it is fully invariant to (monotonic) calibration:
as long as a calibration procedure does not change the ranking of the returned risk scores, AUROC will
be the same before and after calibration.

Compatibility of equal calibration and discriminative ability.
Following the publication of various incompatibility theorems [11, 46], a misconception can sometimes
be observed that calibration by group and error rate parity (also called equalized odds) cannot be
achieved simultaneously, except in degenerate cases. This is not true, however, and results from a
misinterpretation of the original theorems: it is indeed possible to achieve both properties
simultaneously, also in nontrivial cases [35, 52]. 4 What is impossible to achieve is a risk model that
simultaneously satisfies calibration by group and separation, defined as 𝑅 ⟂ 𝐺 ∣ 𝑌 [6]. Separation would
require the conditional risk distributions 𝑝(𝑅 ∣ 𝐺, 𝑌 ) to be identical across groups, which is impossible
to achieve if 𝑅 is calibrated by groups and there are differences in the base rates 𝑝(𝑌 = 1 ∣ 𝐺) [46]. We
mention this here, because an intuitively appealing way to achieve similar discriminative ability across
groups might be to require identical risk score distributions 𝑝(𝑅 ∣ 𝐺, 𝑌 ) across groups, i.e., separation in
terms of the risk scores 𝑅. In fact, the use of this fairness definition for risk scores has been proposed in
the literature [74]. As shown, however, this definition is in conflict with the aim of calibration by
groups, which we consider central to risk score modeling. It also penalizes predictors that fully conform
with our aims: for example, a risk model can achieve equal AUROC scores in two groups and be
perfectly calibrated by groups while violating separation, see fig. 1 for an example. To conclude, we
emphasize that we do not consider separation a suitable fairness criterion for risk scores, and that
calibration by groups and equal discriminative ability by groups are fully compatible.
Readers familiar with the standard algorithmic fairness literature may have noticed that our two
desiderata outlined above – calibration by groups and similar discriminative ability across groups –
closely match two of the three standard definitions of classification fairness: sufficiency, separation, and
independence [6]. Calibration by groups implies sufficiency [6], and while we explicitly do not require
separation (for reasons discussed above), that fairness conception could also be seen as an attempt to
achieve similar discriminative ability across groups. However, we did not discuss anything similar to
independence or demographic parity so far. This will change in the following section.

    3 In order to avoid any confusion caused by an unfortunate clash of terminology in the fairness context, we emphasize that

discriminative ability is a desirable model property and not related to unfair discrimination.
    4 The misconception results from applying one criterion – calibration by groups – to the risk scores 𝑅 ∈ [0, 1] while applying

the second criterion – separation – to binary predictions 𝑌̂ ∈ {0, 1} derived from the risk scores. The incompatibility theorem [6]
only holds when applying both properties to the same entity, i.e., either 𝑅 or 𝑌̂ . For a longer discussion of this issue, refer to
Lazar Reich and Vijaykumar [52].




                                                                5
Petersen et al.                                                                    On (assessing) the fairness of risk score models


                   (True) risk score distribution                        ROC diagram                                    Relative representation in selected set




                                                                                                   P (G | Ŷ =1)/P (G | Y =1)
              2                                            1.0                                                           1.5
Density p(ρ | G)


                                                           0.8
                                                           0.6                                                           1.0




                                                     TPR
              1
                                                           0.4                                                           0.5
                                                           0.2
              0                                            0.0                                                           0.0
               0.00     0.25 0.50 0.75        1.00               0.0   0.2   0.4 0.6   0.8   1.0                                0.0      0.5          1.0
                         True risk ρ = R                                       FPR                                                        τ

Figure 1: A simple example illustrating how a model can be well-calibrated across groups and AUROC-
fair (while violating separation), and how unfair ranking can arise even from such well-calibrated and
AUROC-fair models. The left panel shows the distributions of true risks 𝜏 = 𝑝(𝑌 ∣ 𝑋 , 𝐺) in two groups
(blue and orange, assumed equally large). Their respective base rates are 𝑝(𝑌 = 1 ∣ 𝐺 = blue) = 2/3 and
𝑝(𝑌 = 1 ∣ 𝐺 = orange) = 1/3. We assume that the true risks are perfectly captured by the model, i.e., 𝑅 = 𝜏
for each subject. Thus, the model is perfectly well-calibrated in both groups. (Note that 𝑅 = 𝜏 is not a
necessary requirement for a model to be simultaneously perfectly well-calibrated and AUROC-fair.) Both
groups have identical ROC curves and AUROCs. Nevertheless, the model violates separation (𝑅 ⟂ 𝐺 ∣ 𝑌 ),
and enforcing the model to achieve separation would render calibration by groups and the prediction
of the true risks impossible [6]. Thus, we argue (section 3) that separation is not a suitable fairness
requirement for risk score models. In addition, due to the differing risk distributions, one group or the
other is highly over- or underrepresented in the selected set at different decision thresholds, relative to
their respective target representation 𝑝(𝐺 ∣ 𝑌 = 1) (right panel). This illustrates how even a fair risk
score model can lead to a potentially unfair ranking (see section 4).


4                  Risk score-based fair ranking and resource allocation
In scarce resource distribution settings, such as medical triage, it is a natural idea to use risk models
for informing decisions about resource distribution [50, 70]. However, as we will outline here, such a
procedure can lead to highly unfair distribution processes, even if the underlying risk score model is
epistemically fair in the sense defined above.
    For fair resource distribution, we will typically want to impose some requirement on the representation
of groups in the selected group, i.e., 𝑝(𝐺 ∣ 𝑌̂ = 1). As one example, we might require

                                                       𝑝(𝐺 ∣ 𝑌̂ = 1) = 𝑝(𝐺 ∣ 𝑌 = 1)           ∀ 𝐺,                                                          (2)

that is, that the fraction of the selected individuals that is from group 𝐺 matches the fraction of individuals
with outcome 𝑌 = 1 that is from group 𝐺. This is similar to the classical independence requirement 𝑅 ⟂ 𝐺,
in the sense that we impose a requirement on the representation of groups in the selected set, regardless
of the actual outcome 𝑌 of the selected individuals. Since the amount of available resources is often
unknown a priori or may change over time, we would want this to hold for any decision threshold 𝜏 , at
least in a certain threshold range T = [𝜏min , 𝜏max ] of interest. 5
    Unfortunately, the requirement outlined above is, in general, incompatible with the fundamental
aim of risk modeling, i.e., to approximate the true risk 𝜌 of individuals as accurately as possible. Since
the expression on the right-hand side of eq. (2) is threshold-independent, this would require that the
risk score distributions 𝑝(𝑅 ∣ 𝐺) be proportional to one another within the threshold range T. However,
the distribution of true risks 𝑝(𝜌 ∣ 𝐺) may differ between groups, and in particular, they may not be
proportional to one another within the range 𝜌 ∈ T. Thus, the outlined representation requirement is in

   5 This setting is similar to the one discussed by Vogel et al. [87] and Zehlike et al. [96]. However, Vogel et al. [87] consider

error rate-based metrics, and Zehlike et al. [96] consider a setting in which relative ranking within the selected set matters.




                                                                               6
Petersen et al.                                                     On (assessing) the fairness of risk score models


conflict with the fundamental aim of risk modeling: we can either optimize for risk prediction accuracy,
or for fair ranking, but doing one will detract from the other. A simple illustration of this issue and its
consequences for (un)fair resource access prioritization is shown in fig. 1.
    Of course, a risk score can still be used as the basis for a fair ranking scheme that fulfils eq. (2) for all
thresholds of interest, using various methods described in the score-based fair ranking literature [87, 94,
96]. However, the result of such a process would no longer represent a risk model itself, since its scores
would have been adjusted in a manner that optimizes representation fairness while possibly detracting
from risk accuracy. This means that while a fair ranking can be derived from a fair risk score, ranking
directly based on the predicted risk scores is likely to be unfair.


5      Assessing the fairness of risk score models
We now turn our attention to the empirical quantification of risk model fairness. In section 5.1, we
lay out fundamental requirements on metrics to be used for such assessments, most of which derive
from the observation that in fairness analyses, groups of different sizes are compared. Based on these
requirements, we then lay out our choice of specific metrics in section 5.2. The code for all our metric
implementations is available online. 6

5.1      Comparing metrics between groups
In almost all practical fairness analyses, groups of different sizes will be compared, with important
methodological consequences. First, metrics computed on small test groups will generally suffer from
higher uncertainty compared to larger groups. In order to perform a proper comparison between groups,
quantifying this uncertainty is crucial. As we observe in our case studies in section 6, metric uncertainty
in small groups is often so high that statements concerning unfairness cannot be made with any certainty.
Second, and at least as importantly, comparing groups of different sizes requires sample size-unbiased
metrics. For instance, standard calibration error metrics exhibit a strong sample size bias, returning
higher values in smaller groups even when predictions are equally well-calibrated [32, 49, 79]. This
is clearly problematic when using such a metric for comparing model performance between groups of
different sizes – as is widely done – since one might wrongly conclude that groups are differently well-
calibrated when the underlying calibration quality is the same but group sizes differ. We will investigate
this sample size bias and alternative, less biased ways of quantifying calibration errors in section 5.2.1.
An additional requirement on metrics to be used in fairness analyses results from different groups having
different base rates 𝑝(𝑌 ∣ 𝐺): in order to meaningfully compare metrics between groups, metrics must
be – at least to a large degree – invariant with respect to varying base rates.
     Finally, how to perform the actual comparisons? Researchers have proposed, for example, pair-wise
group comparisons, comparisons to the best-performing group in each metric, and comparisons to the
complement of each group, i.e., all individuals that are not members of the group under consideration.
Comparisons have been performed by assessing, for example, metric differences or metric ratios between
groups. In the interest of obtaining supposedly objective statements regarding the presence or absence of
unfairness, one might also consider statistical hypothesis testing regarding group differences. However,
the challenges surrounding the use of statistical hypothesis testing and p-values are well-documented [31].
Ultimately, the domain expert will need to decide which level of differences between groups, and at which
level of certainty, is considered problematic. In order to maximize information flow to the domain expert,
we thus argue for simply reporting confidence intervals for each metric and group separately, instead of
any derived (e.g., difference or ratio-based) quantities. For the same reason, we consider it essential to
report not just a single metric value, but to accompany each metric with a detailed graphical assessment
that enables a more detailed assessment.

    6 A link to the code will be added here after acceptance.




                                                                7
Petersen et al.                                            On (assessing) the fairness of risk score models


5.2     Choice of specific metrics
Throughout the previous sections, we have outlined a number of requirements for metrics to be used in
fairness comparisons. These included, in particular,
   1. orthogonality (calibration metrics should be independent of discriminative ability, and vice versa),
   2. sample size-unbiasedness (the expected value of a metric should not depend on the size of the test
      sample), and
   3. independence of group base rates (it should be meaningful to compare groups with different base
      rates).
Finally, to reiterate, we are interested in metrics that assess risk scores 𝑅 ∈ [0, 1], not binary classifica-
tions 𝑌̂ ∈ {0, 1}.

5.2.1   Calibration performance metrics
Following our discussion of calibration error metrics and their sample size biases in section 2, we here
propose a combination of two previously described methods, which we show to further reduce sample
size bias and metric variability compared to both of them. In particular, we propose to combine the
debiasing method of Kumar et al. [49] with an adaptive bin count search method similar to the one
described by Roelofs et al. [79]. To find the largest bin count that still yields a monotonic calibration
curve, Roelofs et al. [79] iteratively increase the number of bins 𝑁𝐵 one by one until the calibration
curve becomes non-monotonic. Here, to speed up convergence, we use a simple interval search method
for 𝑁𝐵 instead. Moreover, we ensure that each bin always contains at least 10 samples. We accompany
our calibration analyses with loess-based reliability diagrams [3] using bootstrap-derived confidence
intervals [2]. Further metrics could be considered, such as the calibration intercept for assessing whether
risks are on average over- or underestimated in a group [86].
    Figure 2 shows the distribution of calibration metric values in two simple synthetic test cases, one
perfectly calibrated and one poorly calibrated. In agreement with previous publications [32, 79] we find
that standard ECE and ACE (with a fixed number of 𝑁𝑏 = 15 bins) exhibit strong biases especially for well-
calibrated models and small sample sizes, and that both adaptive bin count search and calibration error
debiasing as proposed by Kumar et al. [49] improve metric reliability. In particular, the combination of the
debiased root mean square calibration error (DRMSCE) proposed by Kumar et al. [49] with our adaptive
bin count search described above outperforms all other metrics. We will simply call this combination
DRMSCE and use it in the two case studies presented in section 6.

5.2.2   Discriminative ability
We use AUROC as our main metric to quantify discriminative ability, as it is independent of calibration
performance, sample size-unbiased, and largely independent of group base rates. In case of strong
class imbalance, i.e., 𝑝(𝑌 ) ≪ 0.5, we perform precision-recall analysis instead, as recommended in the
literature [57, 81]. In order to enable meaningful comparisons between groups of different base rates,
we use the area under the precision-recall-gain curve (AUPRG) in this case, which represents a properly
normalized AUPR [21]. We accompany our analyses of discriminative ability with ROC and PRG curves,
including bootstrap-based confidence intervals.

5.2.3   Ranking fairness
In order to quantify ranking fairness according to the criterion proposed in section 4, we introduce the
expected under-representation, which we define as
                                              {                                 }
                                                      𝑝(𝐺 ∣ 𝑌̂ (𝑅; 𝜏 ) = 1)
                         EUR(𝐺) = E𝜏 ∼𝑝emp (𝑅) min                          ,1    ,                   (3)
                                                    ( 𝑝(𝐺 ∣ 𝑌 = 1)             )



                                                      8
 Petersen et al.                                                                                  On (assessing) the fairness of risk score models


                                                    ρ = R (perfect calibration)                                  ρ = R2 (poor calibration)
Calibration error metric value
                                 0.20                                                           0.3

                                 0.15
                                                                                                0.2
                                 0.10
                                                                                                0.1
                                 0.05

                                 0.00                                                           0.0
                                              100             1000                10000                    100            1000               10000
                                                       Test sample size NS                                         Test sample size NS

                                        ECE            ECE (BCS)             ACE                ACE (BCS)             Kumar              Kumar (BCS)


Figure 2: Analysis of the bias of different calibration error metrics with respect to test sample size 𝑁𝑆 .
Model predictions 𝑅 are drawn from a standard uniform distribution; true risks are then given by 𝜌 = 𝑅
(perfectly calibrated) or 𝜌 = 𝑅 2 (poorly calibrated), and binary outcomes 𝑌 are drawn from a Bernoulli
distribution with risk 𝜌. Horizontal lines indicate the ground-truth expected calibration error (solid) and
the ground-truth root mean squared calibration error (dotted). Each experiment is repeated 100 times,
and a boxenplot [36] over the distribution of the resulting metric values is shown. For a clarification of
the compared metrics, refer to the main text (section 2 and section 5.2.1); “(BCS)” denotes our adaptive
bin count search method. Note the different scaling of the y axes.


where 𝑌̂ (𝑅; 𝜏 ) denotes binary decisions derived from 𝑅 using threshold 𝜏 , and 𝑝emp (𝑅) denotes the
empirical distribution of risk scores in the test set across all groups. The ranking fairness analyses are
accompanied by a plot of the normalized group representation

                                                                                   𝑝(𝐺 ∣ 𝑌̂ (𝑅; 𝜏 ) = 1)
                                                                                     𝑝(𝐺 ∣ 𝑌 = 1)

 as a function of the decision threshold 𝜏 , again using bootstrap-based uncertainty quantification.


 6                                 Case studies
We present two real-world case studies to illustrate our fairness assessment methodology.

 6.1                                    Experimental methodology
Datasets are split into training, validation, and test sets, and we train a standard XGBoost [10]
classification model on the training set. We perform randomized hyperparameter search using five-fold
cross-validation on the training set and calibrate the resulting model using beta calibration [47] (first
case study, because of relatively small validation set size) and isotonic regression [93] (second case
study), respectively, on the validation set. We select a set of sensitive attributes to consider (e.g., gender,
age group, etc.), and perform our further analyses for all groups that can be constructed from value
combinations of these attributes (say, elderly women), and that surpass a minimum group size
threshold.
    Performance is evaluated on the hold-out test set, and we use a simple test set bootstrapping method
to quantify metric uncertainty. From the overall test set, we select the 𝑁𝑔 samples belonging to group 𝑔.
We then draw 𝑁𝐵 = 200 bootstrapped test sets (each of size 𝑁𝑔 ) from this original group-specific test set,
compute the metric of interest (e.g., AUROC or calibration error) on each of them, and use the obtained



                                                                                            9
Petersen et al.                                                        On (assessing) the fairness of risk score models


distribution of metric values for quantifying the uncertainty associated with this metric on this particular
group. In particular, we will consider the median and the (percentile-based) 95% confidence intervals for
further analysis. The code for our analyses is available online. 7

6.2     Case study A: Catalan juvenile recidivism risk assessment
We use a dataset on juvenile recidivism provided by the Centre for Legal Studies and Specialised
Training (CEJFE) within the Department of Justice of the Government of Catalonia, 8 analyses of which
have been previously published by Tolan et al. [85] and Fuglsang-Damgaard and Zinck [27]. The
dataset provides information about juvenile subjects who have participated in an educational program
following a conviction of a criminal act in Catalonia. We predict the risk of recidivism within five years
after completion of the educational program, based on subject age at time of the crime and at time of
program completion, sex, area of origin, province of residence, the number of prior criminal records, the
province in which the educational program was executed, crime category and specific type, and the
type of educational program. We use the preprocessing described by Fuglsang-Damgaard and Zinck
[27], available online. 9 The processed dataset contains 4652 samples (34% recidivism rate), and we use
70% / 10% / 20% for the training / validation / test sets, stratifying on the recidivism outcome. We
consider subject sex, age group at time of crime, subject area of origin, as well as the province of
residence as sensitive variables for our fairness analyses, and we use a minimum test set group size of
100 for our fairness analyses, leaving a total of 41 groups to be analyzed.
    Figure 3 shows the results of our analyses. Overall model performance is reasonable (AUROC > 0.7,
DRMSCE < 0.05) given the limited amount of input information. As expected, metric uncertainty in
small test groups is very high, making reliable statements about the fairness or unfairness of the model
near-impossible.

6.3     Case study B: National registry depression risk assessment
Major Depressive Disorder (MDD) is considered the most burdensome disease in Europe [90] and the
leading cause of disability globally [91]. To address this challenge, depression risk assessments have
been proposed for early detection and prevention [25, 62, 88]. At the same time, public authorities and
health insurance companies are actively exploring ML-based healthcare resource prioritization, in mental
health and other domains [40, 69, 76]. In this case study, we aim to investigate potential algorithmic
fairness challenges that arise when using a depression risk assessment to decide who gets access to
limited healthcare resources, and who does not.
    We use data from a national registry database 10 that includes demographic and healthcare status
information of the national population aged 15 years or older per the 31st of December from 2000–2018.
For each year, we include all subjects diagnosed by a medical practitioner with MDD (ICD codes DF32
and DF33) within that year as cases. Control subjects were sampled without replacement from those
who were not diagnosed with MDD that year, were alive at the end of the year, and were not previously
selected as cases. Two equally sized cohorts without subject overlap were constructed this way, one for
training, and one for validation and testing, both balanced between cases and controls and containing
approximately 240,000 subjects each. The latter set was split into validation (1/3) and test (2/3) sets. We
train a model to predict MDD diagnosis from demographic information; a complete list of predictors and

   7 The link to the code will be added here after peer review.
    8 The dataset can be downloaded at https://cejfe.gencat.cat/en/recerca/opendata/jjuvenil/reincidencia-justicia-menors/index.

html.
    9 https://github.com/elisabethzinck/Fairness-oriented-interpretability-of-predictive-algorithms/blob/main/src/data/

cleaning-catalan-juvenile-recidivism-data.py
   10 To maintain full anonymity during peer review, we have removed any information about the country from which data were

collected.




                                                                  10
Petersen et al.                                                                                                                                                                       On (assessing) the fairness of risk score models



                                                                                                                                                                                      1.0
                       0.15
                                                                                                                                                                                      0.8




                                                                                                                                                                     P (Y | R, G)
    DRMSCE




                       0.10                                                                                                                                                           0.6

                                                                                                                                                                                      0.4
                       0.05
                                                                                                                                                                                      0.2
                       0.00                                                                                                                                                           0.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                  0.0   0.2   0.4         0.6   0.8   1.0
                                                                                            Group
                                                                                                                                                                                                              Risk Score R
                                                                                                                                                                                      1.0

                        0.8                                                                                                                                                           0.8
         AUROC




                                                                                                                                                                                      0.6




                                                                                                                                                                     TPR
                        0.7
                                                                                                                                                                                      0.4
                        0.6                                                                                                                                                           0.2

                                                                                                                                                                                      0.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                  0.0   0.2   0.4         0.6   0.8   1.0
                                                                                            Group
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    FPR
                                                                                                                                                                                      1.0
                       0.75
                                                                                                                                                                                      0.8
                                                                                                                                                                     Precision Gain




                       0.50
AUPRG




                                                                                                                                                                                      0.6
                       0.25                                                                                                                                                           0.4
                       0.00                                                                                                                                                           0.2

           −0.25                                                                                                                                                                      0.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                  0.0   0.2   0.4         0.6   0.8   1.0
                                                                                            Group
                                                                                                                                                                                                              Recall Gain

                       103                                                                                                                                                                   4
                                                                                                                         Age 16.4–17.0y
                                              Male & Age 14.6–15.2y
                                                   & Province: BAR




                                                                                          Female &
                                                                                       Origin: Spain

                                                                                                       Age 14.0–14.6y
                                                                                                       & Origin: Spain




                                                                                                                                                Male &
                                                                                                                                          Origin: Spain
                                                                             Male &
                                                                      Age 14.6–15.2y
                               Origin: LA &
                              Province: BAR




                                                                                                                                                          All




                                                                                                                                                                               Density p(R | G)
        Sample count




                                                                                                                                                                                             3

                                                                                                                                                                                             2

                                                                                                                                                                                             1

                       102                                                                                                                                                                   0
                                                                                                                                                                                                  0.0   0.2   0.4         0.6   0.8   1.0
                                                                                           Group
                                                                                                                                                                                                              Risk score R

Figure 3: Analysis results for the Catalan juvenile recidivism dataset, on a few selected subgroups.
The left column shows the distribution of metric values obtained by test set bootstrapping as described
in section 5.1. For details regarding the different metrics, refer to section 5.2. The right column shows (top
to bottom) a loess-based reliability diagram [2, 3] (with the best and worst calibrated groups according
to DRMSCE), a receiver-operating characteristic (ROC) diagram (with the best and worst-performing
groups according to AUROC), a precision-recall-gain diagram (with the best and worst-performing
groups according to AUPRG), and the distribution of risk values in the different groups. The same colors
are used for all groups in all panels, cf. the bottom left plot for a key. DRMSCE is equivalent to Kumar
(BCS) in fig. 2, LA=Latin America, and BAR=Barcelona. Age refers to age at time of crime.




                                                                                                                                                                11
Petersen et al.                                           On (assessing) the fairness of risk score models


sensitive variables can be found in appendix A. We analyze model performance in groups with a test set
size of at least 2,000 subjects.
    Figure 4 shows the results of our analyses. Overall model performance is again reasonable
(AUROC > 0.7) and especially overall calibration is very good (DRMSCE < 0.01). Moreover, since this
dataset is much larger, more reliable statements regarding potential disparities can be made. Some
groups are clearly better calibrated than others; the groups that are poorer calibrated tend to be small.
There are also large differences in discriminative ability, with AUROCs ranging from 0.6 to 0.75 in
different groups. (We did not consider AUPRG here since the dataset is perfectly outcome-balanced.)
This is also reflected in measures of under-representation in the selected set: subjects from groups with
higher AUROCs tend to receive more extreme risk estimates, resulting in them being selected earlier
compared to subjects in groups with lower AUROCs.


7    Discussion, limitations, and open challenges
In the following, we will discuss important outcomes and limitations of our analyses and case studies.

Challenges posed by varying test sample sizes.
While the issue of varying training set sizes for different groups has received widespread attention in
the fairness literature, challenges posed by varying test set sizes are less widely discussed. In small test
groups, such as in our juvenile recidivism case study, metric uncertainty is often so high that
statements about fairness or unfairness cannot be made with any degree of certainty – and this is even
after excluding groups below a minimum group size. It should thus be emphasized that ensuring broad
group representation in the test set is at least as important as ensuring representation in the training set.
Concerning metric evaluation, it is paramount that researchers take sample size variability into account
in their analyses and use proper metric uncertainty estimates as well as sample size-unbiased metrics,
such as the new calibration error metric we propose here.

Choice of metrics
We do not aim to make specific metric recommendations here; rather, our aim was to elucidate the basic
requirements that any appropriate metric will need to fulfill (see section 5.2). The choice of the most
appropriate metrics to consider will always be application-dependent [57]. For instance, AUROC and
AUPRG take the whole threshold range into account – in many applications, however, a smaller range
of thresholds may be of interest, thus rendering partial AUCs more appropriate [60]. Various other
variations on ROC-based and ranking metrics have also been proposed [87], such as xAUC [42], which
measures the likelihood that a random positive example from one group will be ranked above a random
negative example from another group.

Performance differences and unfairness mitigation.
In our case studies, we observe that calibration and discriminative performance are, indeed, independent
properties: groups can perform well on both, either of them, or none of them. At the same time, we
observe, like many others before us, that our models perform better on some groups compared to others.
What are the origins of such performance differences? Saving a more complete discussion of this question
for elsewhere, we briefly remark that performance differences can result from a number of root causes,
including group under-representation [51], algorithmic choices [24, 37], missing covariate information
that is more important for some groups compared to others, and varying levels of input or label noise
across groups [97]. While some of the resulting performance differences can be reduced by means of
algorithmic interventions, this has generally proven to be a challenging endeavour. A number of studies
have found that algorithmic solutions to fairness problems often yield undesirable or only marginally



                                                     12
Petersen et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                On (assessing) the fairness of risk score models




                 0.06                                                                                                                                                                                                                   1.0

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        0.8




                                                                                                                                                                                                                        P (Y | R, G)
                 0.04
DRMSCE




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        0.6

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        0.4
                 0.02
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        0.2
                 0.00
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        0.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           0.0     0.2    0.4       0.6      0.8     1.0
                                                                                                                            Group
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Risk Score R
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        1.0
                 0.75
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        0.8
                 0.70
AUROC




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        0.6




                                                                                                                                                                                                                        TPR
                 0.65                                                                                                                                                                                                                   0.4

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        0.2
                 0.60
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        0.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           0.0     0.2    0.4         0.6    0.8     1.0
                                                                                                                            Group
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                FPR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              P (G | Ŷ =1)/P (G | Y =1)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      4
                 0.75
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      3
EUR




                 0.50
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      2
                 0.25                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 1

                 0.00                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             0.5    0.6   0.7         0.8   0.9    1.0
                                                                                                                            Group
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ECDF(R, τ )
                        Male & Age 20–25y
                        & 0–11y Education

                                            Non-immigrant & 15+y
                                                                   Education & Region A
                                                                                               Non-immigrant &
                                                                                          Age 20–25y & Region B

                                                                                                                  Female & Income Q3
                                                                                                                    & 15+y Education

                                                                                                                                        Male & Not Living
                                                                                                                                       Alone & Income Q4




                                                                                                                                                                           Age 25–65y &
                                                                                                                                                                                          Income Q4 & Region C
                                                                                                                                                            Income Q4 &
                                                                                                                                                                Region C




                                                                                                                                                                                                                 All




                 105
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Density p(R | G)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      6
  Sample count




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      4
                 104
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      2

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           0.0     0.2    0.4        0.6     0.8     1.0
                                                                                                                           Group
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Risk score R


Figure 4: Analysis results for the depression dataset, on a few selected subgroups. The left column
shows the distribution of metric values obtained by test set bootstrapping as described in section 5.1. For
details regarding the different metrics, refer to section 5.2. The right column shows (top to bottom) a
loess-based reliability diagram [2, 3] (with the best and worst calibrated groups according to DRMSCE), a
receiver-operating characteristic (ROC) diagram (with the best and worst-performing groups according to
AUROC), group representation 𝑝(𝐺 ∣ 𝑌̂ =1) as a function of the decision threshold 𝜏 , and the distribution
of risk values in the different groups. The same colors are used for all groups in all panels, cf. the bottom
left plot for a key. Income QX denotes equivalized household income quartile X, cf. appendix A for
details.




                                                                                                                                                                                                                       13
Petersen et al.                                           On (assessing) the fairness of risk score models


improved results [72, 73]. This is not surprising: if the underlying problem is that there are simply too
few samples from a group, or that data from one group are more noisy than those from others, purely
algorithmic interventions seem unlikely to solve the issue. Instead, an investment in more and better
data from currently under-performing groups will often be the more promising approach.

Risk scores and fair ranking.
We have discussed the relationship between fair risk scores and fair ranking, finding that while a fair
ranking can be derived from a fair risk score, ranking directly based on the predicted risk is likely to be
unfair (see fig. 1). Another interaction between discriminative ability and ranking can be observed in
our second case study (see fig. 4). Groups in which prediction is harder (as indicated, for instance, by
lower AUROC) tend to receive less extreme risk estimates and are, thus, likely to be under-represented
in a risk-based set selection scheme. Following our findings, one might consider it more appropriate to
report both an estimated risk score and a suggested ranking based on the computed risks. This, of course,
raises further challenges of real-world human–model interaction, many of which are yet to be addressed
even for the “simple” risk-only case [29, 30, 58, 78, 83, 92]. In addition, there are further complexities
involved in fair ranking for resource prioritization, as we will discuss next.

Artificially quantized quantities.
Our study – like most of the current literature – is based on the assumption of discrete outcomes. However,
real-world outcomes often do not conform with discrete categories (“disease present” – ”disease absent”).
Instead, disease severity is often a continuous property that is artificially discretized during the data
collection procedure. Such artificial discretization of continuous variables is well-known to confound
statistical analyses [1, 68, 80], and it might also cause problems in our setting. For example, while disease
incidence might be similar in two groups, disease severity could be higher in one group compared to the
other, with important consequences for what would be considered a “fair” ranking. Such differences are
brushed over by approaches relying on discretized outcomes.

Biased data.
One crucial limitation of our study and most other approaches to algorithmic fairness is its underlying
assumption that the available data are unbiased [26]. All of our metrics – like most metrics currently
used in the literature – can hide arbitrary degrees of unfairness if the dataset suffers from, for instance,
selection biases [5, 41], label biases [5, 97], or the choice of a biased proxy variable [69]. Further
aggravating the problem, such biases are often undetectable without deep domain knowledge or further
data collection efforts. Like others [38], We consider this one of the fundamental challenges of
algorithmic fairness, and we highly appreciate attempts [23, 56, 69, 89] to address this problem. Even
leaving objective measurement biases aside, subjective choices are always involved in the decision to
measure a quantity, label something a crime or a disease, or include certain subjects but not others [5, 7,
61]. In this sense, it is crucial to realize that risk models can never be fully neutral or objective.

Fairness analyses in context.
We here judge the fairness of a risk model purely based on the joint distribution of generated risk scores 𝑅,
group membership 𝐺, and output labels 𝑌 , ignoring questions of interpretability [12, 54, 55], procedural
fairness [53], algorithmic recourse [43], or wider societal context [7, 61]. It is known, for example, that
some demographic groups suffer from worse access to healthcare services compared to others. “Fairly”
equalizing the access of groups to a particular healthcare service, while disregarding such discrepancies
in baseline healthcare access, might contribute to deepening existing healthcare disparities. Decisions
on whether or how to deploy an algorithm in the real world should thus never be based purely on a
narrow fairness analysis such as ours. Instead, a comprehensive assessment of real-world complexities



                                                     14
Petersen et al.                                           On (assessing) the fairness of risk score models


is essential, in which an analysis using our methodology can play just a small part [29, 30, 63, 78, 82, 99].
Nevertheless, fine-grained analyses of the different places in which unfairness can occur are crucial to
navigate this immensely complex decision space, and we hope our work to be valuable towards this end.


8      Conclusion
Our main argument in this paper has been that the fairness of risk score models should be evaluated
on their own, that is, independent of any subsequent decision-making processes. The reasons for this
perspective were twofold. First, separating between the fairness of a model and the fairness of decisions
made based on that model enables a more fine-grained analysis and discussion about the sources of
unfairness. And second, risk models are indeed often used to provide information to human decision-
makers, or at time-varying decision thresholds, in which case it is even more crucial to assess the model’s
fairness on its own. We have further argued that the fairness of risk score models then is a function of the
epistemic value they provide to different groups, and we have proposed metrics to empirically quantify
this epistemic value, including a novel, debiased calibration error metric. Finally, we have considered the
fairness of risk-based resource prioritization, finding that a ranking of subjects based purely on predicted
risks will often be unfair.

Acknowledgements
The authors would like to thank Vibe Frøkjær, Neurobiology Research Unit, Copenhagen University
Hospital, Rigshospitalet, and Merete Osler, Department of Public Health, University of Copenhagen, for
help with the MDD study conception. The authors would also like to thank Emily Beaman, Department
of Biomedical Sciences, University of Copenhagen, for assistance with the data analysis in the MDD
study.

Funding sources
Work on this project was funded by the Independent Research Fund Denmark (DFF), grant number 9131-
00097B. The funding agency had no influence on the writing of this manuscript, nor on the decision to
submit it for publication. All authors are affiliated with the Pioneer Centre for AI, DNRF grant number P1.


References
 [1]   Douglas G. Altman and Patrick Royston. “The cost of dichotomising continuous variables.” In:
       BMJ 332.7549 (2006), p. 1080.1. d oi: 10.1136/bmj.332.7549.1080.
 [2]   Peter C. Austin and Ewout W. Steyerberg. “Bootstrap confidence intervals for loess-based calibra-
       tion curves.” In: Statistics in Medicine 33.15 (2014), pp. 2699–2700. d o i: 10.1002/sim.6167.
 [3]   Peter C. Austin and Ewout W. Steyerberg. “Graphical assessment of internal and external calibra-
       tion of logistic regression models by using loess smoothers.” In: Statistics in Medicine 33.3 (2013),
       pp. 517–535. d o i: 10.1002/sim.5941.
 [4]   Donald Bamber. “The area above the ordinal dominance graph and the area below the receiver
       operating characteristic graph.” In: Journal of Mathematical Psychology 12.4 (1975), pp. 387–415.
       d oi: 10.1016/0022-2496(75)90001-2.
 [5]   Michelle Bao et al. “It’s COMPASlicated: The Messy Relationship between RAI Datasets and
       Algorithmic Fairness Benchmarks.” In: Thirty-fifth Conference on Neural Information Processing
       Systems       Datasets      and    Benchmarks         Track.                  2022.      u r l:
       https://openreview.net/forum?id=qeM58whnpXM.




                                                     15
Petersen et al.                                          On (assessing) the fairness of risk score models


 [6]   Solon Barocas, Moritz Hardt, and Arvind Narayanan. Fairness and Machine Learning: Limitations
       and Opportunities. http://www.fairmlbook.org. fairmlbook.org, 2019.
 [7]   Justin B. Biddle. “On Predicting Recidivism: Epistemic Risk, Tradeoffs, and Values in Machine
       Learning.” In: Canadian Journal of Philosophy 52.3 (2020), pp. 321–341. d o i: 10.1017/can.2020.27.
 [8]   Jochen Bröcker. “Estimating reliability and resolution of probability forecasts through
       decomposition of the empirical score.” In: Climate Dynamics 39.3-4 (2011), pp. 655–667. d o i:
       10.1007/s00382-011-1191-1.
 [9]   Jochen Bröcker. “Reliability, sufficiency, and the decomposition of proper scores.” In: Quarterly
       Journal of the Royal Meteorological Society 135.643 (2009), pp. 1512–1519. d o i: 10.1002/qj.456.
[10] Tianqi Chen and Carlos Guestrin. “XGBoost.” In: Proceedings of the 22nd ACM SIGKDD
     International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining.    ACM, 2016. d o i:
     10.1145/2939672.2939785.
[11]   Alexandra Chouldechova. “Fair Prediction with Disparate Impact: A Study of Bias in Recidivism
       Prediction Instruments.” In: Big Data 5.2 (2017), pp. 153–163. d o i: 10.1089/big.2016.0047.
[12]   Jonathan Crabbe et al. “Learning outside the Black-Box: The pursuit of interpretable models.” In:
       Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems. Ed. by H. Larochelle et al. Vol. 33. Curran
       Associates, Inc., 2020, pp. 17838–17849. u r l: https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper/2020/file/
       ce758408f6ef98d7c7a7b786eca7b3a8-Paper.pdf.
[13] Morris H. DeGroot and Stephen E. Fienberg. Assessing Probability Assessors: Calibration and
     Refinement. Tech. rep. Carnegie-Mellon University, Department of Statistics, 1981.
[14] Morris H. DeGroot and Stephen E. Fienberg. “The Comparison and Evaluation of Forecasters.” In:
     The Statistician 32.1/2 (1983), p. 12. d o i: 10.2307/2987588.
[15] Timo Dimitriadis, Tilmann Gneiting, and Alexander I. Jordan. “Stable reliability diagrams for
     probabilistic classifiers.” In: Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 118.8 (2021). d o i:
     10.1073/pnas.2016191118.
[16] Julia Dressel and Hany Farid. “The accuracy, fairness, and limits of predicting recidivism.” In:
     Science Advances 4.1 (2018). d o i: 10.1126/sciadv.aao5580.
[17] European Commission. Proposal for a REGULATION OF THE EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT AND OF
     THE COUNCIL LAYING DOWN HARMONISED RULES ON ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE
     (ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE ACT) AND AMENDING CERTAIN UNION LEGISLATIVE ACTS. 2021.
     u r l: https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/?uri=CELEX:52021PC0206.
[18] C. A. T. Ferro and T. E. Fricker. “A bias-corrected decomposition of the Brier score.” In: Quarterly
     Journal of the Royal Meteorological Society 138.668 (2012), pp. 1954–1960. d o i: 10.1002/qj.1924.
[19] Peter A. Flach. “ROC Analysis.” In: Encyclopedia of Machine Learning and Data Mining. Springer
     US, 2016, pp. 1–8. d o i: 10.1007/978-1-4899-7502-7_739-1.
[20] Peter A. Flach, José Hernández-Orallo, and Cèsar Ferri. “A Coherent Interpretation of AUC as
     a Measure of Aggregated Classification Performance.” In: Proceedings of the 28th International
     Conference on International Conference on Machine Learning. ICML’11. Bellevue, Washington,
     USA: Omnipress, 2011, 657–664. i s b n: 9781450306195.
[21] Peter A. Flach and Meelis Kull. “Precision-Recall-Gain Curves: PR Analysis Done Right.” In:
     Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems. Ed. by C. Cortes et al. Vol. 28. Curran
     Associates,                         Inc.,                       2015.                   u r l:
     https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper/2015/file/33e8075e9970de0cfea955afd4644bb2-Paper.pdf.




                                                   16
Petersen et al.                                          On (assessing) the fairness of risk score models


[22] Peter A. Flach and Edson Matsubara. “On classification, ranking, and probability estimation.”
     In: Probabilistic, Logical and Relational Learning - A Further Synthesis. Ed. by Luc de Raedt et al.
     Vol. 7161. Dagstuhl Seminar Proceedings (DagSemProc). Dagstuhl, Germany: Schloss Dagstuhl
     – Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik, 2008, pp. 1–10. d o i: 10 . 4230 / DagSemProc . 07161 . 8. u r l:
     https://drops.dagstuhl.de/opus/volltexte/2008/1382.
[23] Riccardo Fogliato, Alexandra Chouldechova, and Max G’Sell. “Fairness Evaluation in Presence
     of Biased Noisy Labels.” In: Proceedings of the Twenty Third International Conference on Artificial
     Intelligence and Statistics. Ed. by Silvia Chiappa and Roberto Calandra. Vol. 108. Proceedings of
     Machine Learning Research. PMLR, 2020, pp. 2325–2336. u r l: https://proceedings.mlr.press/
     v108/fogliato20a.html.
[24] Jessica Zosa Forde et al. “Model Selection’s Disparate Impact in Real-World Deep Learning
     Applications.” In: Science and Engineering of Deep Learning Workshop, ICLR 2021 (2021). arXiv:
     2104.00606 [cs.LG].
[25] Eiko I. Fried, Carlotta Rieble, and Ricarda Katharina Karola Proppert. “Building an early warning
     system for depression: rationale, objectives, and methods of the WARN-D study.” In: (2022). doi:
     10.31234/osf.io/9qcvs.
[26] Sorelle A. Friedler, Carlos Scheidegger, and Suresh Venkatasubramanian. “The (Im)possibility of
     fairness.” In: Communications of the ACM 64.4 (2021), pp. 136–143. d o i: 10.1145/3433949.
[27] Caroline Amalie Fuglsang-Damgaard and Elisabeth Zinck. “Fairness-Oriented Interpretability
     of Predictive Algorithms.” M.Sc. thesis. Technical University of Denmark, DTU Compute, 2022.
     u r l: http://fairmed.compute.dtu.dk/files/theses/Fairness- oriented%20interpretability%20of%
     20predictive%20algorithms%20[Fuglsang-Damgaard,%20Zinck]%20(2022).pdf.
[28] Tilmann Gneiting, Fadoua Balabdaoui, and Adrian E. Raftery. “Probabilistic forecasts, calibration
     and sharpness.” In: Journal of the Royal Statistical Society: Series B (Statistical Methodology) 69.2
     (2007), pp. 243–268. d o i: 10.1111/j.1467-9868.2007.00587.x.
[29]   Ben Green and Yiling Chen. “Algorithmic Risk Assessments Can Alter Human Decision-Making
       Processes in High-Stakes Government Contexts.” In: Proceedings of the ACM on Human-Computer
       Interaction 5.CSCW2 (2021), pp. 1–33. d o i: 10.1145/3479562.
[30] Ben Green and Yiling Chen. “Disparate Interactions: An Algorithm-in-the-Loop Analysis of
     Fairness in Risk Assessments.” In: Proceedings of the Conference on Fairness, Accountability, and
     Transparency. ACM, 2019. d o i: 10.1145/3287560.3287563.
[31] Sander Greenland et al. “Statistical tests, P values, confidence intervals, and power: a guide to
     misinterpretations.” In: European Journal of Epidemiology 31.4 (2016), pp. 337–350. d o i: 10.1007/
     s10654-016-0149-3.
[32] Sebastian Gregor Gruber and Florian Buettner. “Better Uncertainty Calibration via Proper Scores
     for Classification and Beyond.” In: Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems. Ed. by
     Alice H. Oh et al. 2022. u r l: https://openreview.net/forum?id=PikKk2lF6P.
[33] J. A. Hanley and B. J. McNeil. “The meaning and use of the area under a receiver operating
     characteristic (ROC) curve.” In: Radiology 143.1 (1982), pp. 29–36. d o i: 10.1148/radiology.143.1.
     7063747.
[34] Moritz Hardt, Eric Price, and Nati Srebro. “Equality of opportunity in supervised learning.” In:
     Advances in neural information processing systems. 2016, pp. 3315–3323.
[35] Brian Hedden. “On statistical criteria of algorithmic fairness.” In: Philosophy & Public Affairs 49.2
     (2021), pp. 209–231. d o i: 10.1111/papa.12189.
[36] Heike Hofmann, Hadley Wickham, and Karen Kafadar. “Letter-Value Plots: Boxplots for Large
     Data.” In: Journal of Computational and Graphical Statistics 26.3 (2017), pp. 469–477. doi: 10.1080/
     10618600.2017.1305277.



                                                   17
Petersen et al.                                            On (assessing) the fairness of risk score models


[37] Sara Hooker. “Moving beyond “algorithmic bias is a data problem”.” In: Patterns 2.4 (2021),
     p. 100241. d o i: 10.1016/j.patter.2021.100241.
[38] Abigail Z. Jacobs and Hanna Wallach. “Measurement and Fairness.” In: Proceedings of the 2021
     ACM Conference on Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency. ACM, 2021. doi: 10.1145/3442188.
     3445901.
[39] E. T. Jaynes. Probability Theory: The Logic of Science. Ed. by G. Larry Bretthorst. New York:
     Cambridge University Press, 2003.
[40] Dan W. Joyce et al. “CHRONOSIG: Digital Triage for Secondary Mental Healthcare using Natural
     Language Processing – Rationale and Protocol.” In: medRxiv (2021). eprint: https://www.medrxiv.
     org/content/early/2021/12/02/2021.11.23.21266750.
[41] Nathan Kallus and Angela Zhou. “Residual Unfairness in Fair Machine Learning from Prejudiced
     Data.” In: Proceedings of the 35th International Conference on Machine Learning. Ed. by Jennifer Dy
     and Andreas Krause. Vol. 80. Proceedings of Machine Learning Research. PMLR, 2018, pp. 2439–
     2448. u r l: https://proceedings.mlr.press/v80/kallus18a.html.
[42] Nathan Kallus and Angela Zhou. “The Fairness of Risk Scores Beyond Classification: Bipartite
     Ranking and the xAUC Metric.” In: Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems. Ed. by
     H. Wallach et al. Vol. 32. Curran Associates, Inc., 2019. u r l: https://proceedings.neurips.cc/
     paper/2019/file/73e0f7487b8e5297182c5a711d20bf26-Paper.pdf.
[43] Amir-Hossein Karimi, Bernhard Schölkopf, and Isabel Valera. “Algorithmic Recourse.” In:
     Proceedings of the 2021 ACM Conference on Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency. ACM, 2021.
     d oi: 10.1145/3442188.3445899.
[44] Michael W. Kattan et al. “American Joint Committee on Cancer acceptance criteria for inclusion
     of risk models for individualized prognosis in the practice of precision medicine.” In: CA: A Cancer
     Journal for Clinicians 66.5 (2016), pp. 370–374. d o i: 10.3322/caac.21339.
[45] Michael Kearns et al. “Preventing Fairness Gerrymandering: Auditing and Learning for Subgroup
     Fairness.” In: Proceedings of the 35th International Conference on Machine Learning. Ed. by
     Jennifer Dy and Andreas Krause. Vol. 80. Proceedings of Machine Learning Research. PMLR,
     2018, pp. 2564–2572. u r l: https://proceedings.mlr.press/v80/kearns18a.html.
[46] Jon Kleinberg, Sendhil Mullainathan, and Manish Raghavan. “Inherent Trade-Offs in the Fair
     Determination of Risk Scores.” In: 8th Innovations in Theoretical Computer Science Conference
     (ITCS 2017). Ed. by Christos H. Papadimitriou. Vol. 67. Leibniz International Proceedings in
     Informatics (LIPIcs). Dagstuhl, Germany: Schloss Dagstuhl–Leibniz-Zentrum fuer Informatik,
     2017, 43:1–43:23. i s b n: 978-3-95977-029-3. d o i: 10 . 4230 / LIPIcs . ITCS . 2017 . 43. u r l: http :
     //drops.dagstuhl.de/opus/volltexte/2017/8156.
[47] Meelis Kull, Telmo M. Silva Filho, and Peter Flach. “Beyond sigmoids: How to obtain
     well-calibrated probabilities from binary classifiers with beta calibration.” In: Electronic Journal of
     Statistics 11.2 (2017). d o i: 10.1214/17-ejs1338si.
[48] Meelis Kull and Peter A. Flach. “Novel Decompositions of Proper Scoring Rules for Classification:
     Score Adjustment as Precursor to Calibration.” In: Machine Learning and Knowledge Discovery in
     Databases. Springer International Publishing, 2015, pp. 68–85. doi: 10.1007/978-3-319-23528-8_5.
[49] Ananya Kumar, Percy S Liang, and Tengyu Ma. “Verified Uncertainty Calibration.” In: Advances
     in Neural Information Processing Systems. Ed. by H. Wallach et al. Vol. 32. Curran Associates, Inc.,
     2019. u r l: https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper/2019/file/f8c0c968632845cd133308b1a494967f-
     Paper.pdf.
[50] Alexander Kutz et al. “The TRIAGE-ProADM Score for an Early Risk Stratification of Medical
     Patients in the Emergency Department - Development Based on a Multi-National, Prospective,
     Observational Study.” In: PLOS ONE 11.12 (2016). Ed. by Tanja Zeller, e0168076. d o i: 10.1371/
     journal.pone.0168076.



                                                     18
Petersen et al.                                          On (assessing) the fairness of risk score models


[51] Agostina J. Larrazabal et al. “Gender imbalance in medical imaging datasets produces biased
     classifiers for computer-aided diagnosis.” In: Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 117.23
     (2020), pp. 12592–12594. d o i: 10.1073/pnas.1919012117.
[52] Claire Lazar Reich and Suhas Vijaykumar. “A Possibility in Algorithmic Fairness: Can Calibration
     and Equal Error Rates Be Reconciled?” In: 2nd Symposium on Foundations of Responsible Computing
     (FORC 2021). Ed. by Katrina Ligett and Swati Gupta. Vol. 192. Leibniz International Proceedings
     in Informatics (LIPIcs). Dagstuhl, Germany: Schloss Dagstuhl – Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik,
     2021, 4:1–4:21. i s b n: 978-3-95977-187-0. d o i: 10.4230/LIPIcs.FORC.2021.4. u r l: https://drops.
     dagstuhl.de/opus/volltexte/2021/13872.
[53] Min Kyung Lee et al. “Procedural Justice in Algorithmic Fairness.” In: Proceedings of the ACM on
     Human-Computer Interaction 3.CSCW (2019), pp. 1–26. d o i: 10.1145/3359284.
[54] Jiachang Liu et al. “FasterRisk: Fast and Accurate Interpretable Risk Scores.” In: Advances in
     Neural Information Processing Systems. Ed. by Alice H. Oh et al. 2022. u r l: https://openreview.
     net/forum?id=xTYL1J6Xt-z.
[55] Eric Loreaux et al. “Boosting the interpretability of clinical risk scores with intervention predic-
     tions.” In: DSHealth at KDD 2022. arXiv, 2022. d o i: 10.48550/ARXIV.2207.02941. u r l: https://
     arxiv.org/abs/2207.02941.
[56] David Madras et al. “Fairness through Causal Awareness: Learning Causal Latent-Variable Models
     for Biased Data.” In: Proceedings of the Conference on Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency.
     ACM, 2019. d o i: 10.1145/3287560.3287564.
[57] Lena Maier-Hein et al. “Metrics reloaded: Pitfalls and recommendations for image analysis vali-
     dation.” In: (2022). arXiv: 2206.01653 [cs.CV].
[58] Pauline Katharina Mantell et al. “Attitudes towards Risk Prediction in a Help Seeking Population of
     Early Detection Centers for Mental Disorders—A Qualitative Approach.” In: International Journal
     of Environmental Research and Public Health 18.3 (2021), p. 1036. d o i: 10.3390/ijerph18031036.
[59] S. J. Mason and N. E. Graham. “Areas beneath the relative operating characteristics (ROC) and
     relative operating levels (ROL) curves: Statistical significance and interpretation.” In: Quarterly
     Journal of the Royal Meteorological Society 128.584 (2002), pp. 2145–2166. d o i:
     10.1256/003590002320603584.
[60] Donna Katzman McClish. “Analyzing a Portion of the ROC Curve.” In: Medical Decision Making
     9.3 (1989), pp. 190–195. d o i: 10.1177/0272989x8900900307.
[61] Melissa McCradden et al. “When Your Only Tool Is A Hammer.” In: Proceedings of the AAAI/ACM
     Conference on AI, Ethics, and Society. ACM, 2020. d o i: 10.1145/3375627.3375824.
[62] Andrew S. Moriarty et al. “Predicting and preventing relapse of depression in primary care.” In:
     British Journal of General Practice 70.691 (2020), pp. 54–55. d o i: 10.3399/bjgp20x707753.
[63] Emanuel Moss et al. “Assembling Accountability: Algorithmic Impact Assessment for the Public
     Interest.” In: SSRN Electronic Journal (2021). d o i: 10.2139/ssrn.3877437.
[64] Allan H. Murphy. “A New Vector Partition of the Probability Score.” In: Journal of Applied
     Meteorology 12.4 (1973), pp. 595–600. d o i: 10.1175/1520-0450(1973)012<0595:anvpot>2.0.co;2.
[65] Mahdi Pakdaman Naeini, Gregory Cooper, and Milos Hauskrecht. “Obtaining Well Calibrated
     Probabilities Using Bayesian Binning.” In: Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial
     Intelligence 29.1 (2015). d o i: 10.1609/aaai.v29i1.9602.
[66] Jeremy Nixon et al. “Measuring Calibration in Deep Learning.” In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
     Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) Workshops. 2019.
[67] Douglas Noble et al. “Risk models and scores for type 2 diabetes: systematic review.” In: BMJ
     343.nov28 1 (2011), pp. d7163–d7163. d o i: 10.1136/bmj.d7163.



                                                   19
Petersen et al.                                           On (assessing) the fairness of risk score models


[68] Luke Oakden-Rayner et al. “Hidden stratification causes clinically meaningful failures in machine
     learning for medical imaging.” In: Proceedings of the ACM Conference on Health, Inference, and
     Learning. ACM, 2020. d o i: 10.1145/3368555.3384468.
[69] Ziad Obermeyer et al. “Dissecting racial bias in an algorithm used to manage the health of popu-
     lations.” In: Science 366.6464 (2019), pp. 447–453. d o i: 10.1126/science.aax2342.
[70] A. S. Patel, A. Harrison, and W. Bruce-Jones. “Evaluation of the risk assessment matrix: a mental
     health triage tool.” In: Emergency Medicine Journal 26.1 (2009), pp. 11–14. doi: 10.1136/emj.2007.
     058388.
[71] Richard Pettigrew. “Epistemic Utility Arguments for Probabilism.” In: The Stanford Encyclopedia of
     Philosophy. Ed. by Edward N. Zalta. Winter 2019. Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University,
     2019.
[72] Stephen R. Pfohl, Agata Foryciarz, and Nigam H. Shah. “An empirical characterization of fair
     machine learning for clinical risk prediction.” In: Journal of Biomedical Informatics 113 (2021),
     p. 103621. d o i: 10.1016/j.jbi.2020.103621.
[73] Stephen R. Pfohl et al. “A comparison of approaches to improve worst-case predictive model
     performance over patient subpopulations.” In: Scientific Reports 12.1 (2022). doi: 10.1038/s41598-
     022-07167-7.
[74] Stephen R. Pfohl et al. “Creating Fair Models of Atherosclerotic Cardiovascular Disease Risk.”
     In: Proceedings of the 2019 AAAI/ACM Conference on AI, Ethics, and Society. ACM, 2019. d o i:
     10.1145/3306618.3314278.
[75] Stephen R. Pfohl et al. “Net benefit, calibration, threshold selection, and training objectives for
     algorithmic fairness in healthcare.” In: 2022 ACM Conference on Fairness, Accountability, and
     Transparency. ACM, 2022. d o i: 10.1145/3531146.3533166.
[76] Aristodemos Pnevmatikakis et al. “Risk Assessment for Personalized Health Insurance Based on
     Real-World Data.” In: Risks 9.3 (2021), p. 46. d o i: 10.3390/risks9030046.
[77] Polygenic Risk Score Task Force of the International Common Disease Alliance. “Responsible use
     of polygenic risk scores in the clinic: potential benefits, risks and gaps.” In: Nature Medicine 27.11
     (2021), pp. 1876–1884. d o i: 10.1038/s41591-021-01549-6.
[78] Ashesh Rambachan et al. “An Economic Perspective on Algorithmic Fairness.” In: AEA Papers and
     Proceedings 110 (2020), pp. 91–95. d o i: 10.1257/pandp.20201036.
[79] Rebecca Roelofs et al. “Mitigating Bias in Calibration Error Estimation.” In: Proceedings of The
     25th International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics. Ed. by Gustau Camps-Valls,
     Francisco J. R. Ruiz, and Isabel Valera. Vol. 151. Proceedings of Machine Learning Research. PMLR,
     2022, pp. 4036–4054. u r l: https://proceedings.mlr.press/v151/roelofs22a.html.
[80] Patrick Royston, Douglas G. Altman, and Willi Sauerbrei. “Dichotomizing continuous predictors
     in multiple regression: a bad idea.” In: Statistics in Medicine 25.1 (2005), pp. 127–141. doi: 10.1002/
     sim.2331.
[81] Takaya Saito and Marc Rehmsmeier. “The Precision-Recall Plot Is More Informative than the
     ROC Plot When Evaluating Binary Classifiers on Imbalanced Datasets.” In: PLOS ONE 10.3 (2015).
     Ed. by Guy Brock, e0118432. d o i: 10.1371/journal.pone.0118432.
[82] Andrew D. Selbst et al. “Fairness and abstraction in sociotechnical systems.” In: Proceedings of the
     Conference on Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency. ACM, 2019, pp. 59–68. d o i: 10.1145/
     3287560.3287598.
[83] Gregory E. Simon et al. “Reconciling Statistical and Clinicians’ Predictions of Suicide Risk.” In:
     Psychiatric Services 72.5 (2021), pp. 555–562. d o i: 10.1176/appi.ps.202000214.




                                                    20
Petersen et al.                                         On (assessing) the fairness of risk score models


[84] Ewout W. Steyerberg et al. “Assessing the Performance of Prediction Models.” In: Epidemiology
     21.1 (2010), pp. 128–138. d o i: 10.1097/ede.0b013e3181c30fb2.
[85] Songül Tolan et al. “Why Machine Learning May Lead to Unfairness.” In: Proceedings of the
     Seventeenth International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Law. ACM, 2019. d o i: 10.1145/
     3322640.3326705.
[86] Ben Van Calster et al. “Calibration: the Achilles heel of predictive analytics.” In: BMC Medicine
     17.1 (2019). d o i: 10.1186/s12916-019-1466-7.
[87] Robin Vogel, Aurélien Bellet, and Stephan Clémençon. “Learning Fair Scoring Functions:
     Bipartite Ranking under ROC-based Fairness Constraints.” In: Proceedings of The 24th
     International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics. Ed. by Arindam Banerjee and
     Kenji Fukumizu. Vol. 130. Proceedings of Machine Learning Research. PMLR, 2021, pp. 784–792.
     u r l: https://proceedings.mlr.press/v130/vogel21a.html.
[88] B. W. Van Voorhees et al. “Predicting Future Risk of Depressive Episode in Adolescents: The
     Chicago Adolescent Depression Risk Assessment (CADRA).” In: The Annals of Family Medicine
     6.6 (2008), pp. 503–511. d o i: 10.1370/afm.887.
[89] Jialu Wang, Yang Liu, and Caleb Levy. “Fair Classification with Group-Dependent Label Noise.”
     In: Proceedings of the 2021 ACM Conference on Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency. ACM,
     2021. d o i: 10.1145/3442188.3445915.
[90] H.U. Wittchen et al. “The size and burden of mental disorders and other disorders of the brain in
     Europe 2010.” In: European Neuropsychopharmacology 21.9 (2011), pp. 655–679. d o i: 10.1016/j.
     euroneuro.2011.07.018.
[91] World Health Organization. Depression and Other Common Mental Disorders: Global Health
     Estimates. Geneva, 2017.
[92] Bobbi Jo H. Yarborough et al. “Clinical implementation of suicide risk prediction models in
     healthcare:     a qualitative study.” In:        BMC Psychiatry 22.1 (2022). d o i:
     10.1186/s12888-022-04400-5.
[93] Bianca Zadrozny and Charles Elkan. “Transforming classifier scores into accurate multiclass
     probability estimates.” In: Proceedings of the eighth ACM SIGKDD international conference on
     Knowledge discovery and data mining. ACM, 2002. d o i: 10.1145/775047.775151.
[94] Meike Zehlike, Ke Yang, and Julia Stoyanovich. “Fairness in Ranking, Part I: Score-based Ranking.”
     In: ACM Computing Surveys (2022). d o i: 10.1145/3533379.
[95] Meike Zehlike, Ke Yang, and Julia Stoyanovich. “Fairness in Ranking, Part II: Learning-to-Rank
     and Recommender Systems.” In: ACM Computing Surveys (2022). d o i: 10.1145/3533380.
[96] Meike Zehlike et al. “Fair Top-k Ranking with multiple protected groups.” In: Information
     Processing & Management 59.1 (2022), p. 102707. d o i: 10.1016/j.ipm.2021.102707.
[97] Haoran Zhang et al. “Improving the Fairness of Chest X-ray Classifiers.” In: Conference on Health,
     Inference, and Learning (CHIL) (2022). arXiv: 2203.12609 [cs.LG].
[98] Zirun Zhao et al. “Prediction model and risk scores of ICU admission and mortality in COVID-19.”
     In: PLOS ONE 15.7 (2020). Ed. by Muhammad Adrish, e0236618. d o i: 10 . 1371 / journal . pone.
     0236618.
[99] Roberto V. Zicari et al. “Z-Inspection® : A Process to Assess Trustworthy AI.” In: IEEE Transactions
     on Technology and Society 2.2 (2021), pp. 83–97. d o i: 10.1109/tts.2021.3066209.




                                                   21
Petersen et al.                                         On (assessing) the fairness of risk score models


A     Additional details on the MDD case study
Subjects may be selected as a control in one year and as a case in a later year (in which they were
diagnosed with MDD), although this occurs only rarely in the dataset.
    The used predictor variables were the following:

    • age,
    • gender (male / female / changed at some time in the available dataset)
    • registered identification as LGBT, as detected by either a registered same-sex partnership or sex
      change,

    • living status (living alone or not),
    • equivalized household income quartile (accounts for number and age of children and combined
      household earning),
    • years of school and university education,

    • heritage (immigrant, child of immigrant parents, non-immigrant),
    • civil status (married, not married, divorced, widowed),
    • number of address changes during the year,
    • larger region of residence,

    • smaller region of residence.
As sensitive variables for our group fairness analyses, we consider age group, gender, registered
identification as LGBT, heritage, larger region of residence, equivalized household income quartile,
living status (alone or not), and number of years of education. We consider groups resulting from the
combination of at most three sensitive variables and with a test set size of at least 2,000 subjects,
resulting in the analysis of model performance in 886 different groups. Figure 4 in the main paper
shows results for eight of those.




                                                   22
