Bias Variance Tradeoff
 Bias and Variance
 Prediction errors can be decomposed into two main
 components: error from bias, and error from variance1

 Bias occurs with an underfit model, which is too simple
 to accurately model the relationship between input
 features X and some target Y

 Variance arises from an overfit model that memorizes
 the training data points, making it unable to generalize
 on the unseen data

 The objective is to minimize the generalization (test)
 error by selecting the appropriate modeling approach to
 find the trade-off between overfitting and underfitting2


1. Machine Learning University (MLU). The Bias Variance Tradeoff. https://mlu-explain.github.io/bias-variance/
2. MOOC Machine learning with scikit-learn. Bias and Variance. https://inria.github.io/scikit-learn-mooc/overfit/bias_vs_variance_slides.html
 Mean Squared Error (MSE) Loss
To understand the bias and variance decomposition, we
first need to look at the mean squared error (MSE), which is
a loss function for regression problems (MSE also equals
Brier score for binary problems)




Below is the canonical decomposition of the squared error
loss into bias and variance (and some irreducible ϵ)1




                                                                  2




1. Raschka S. mxltend. bias_variance_decomp: Bias-variance Decomposition for Classification and Regression Losses. Link
2. Meyer D. A Few Notes on Fisher Information. https://davidmeyer.github.io/ml/fisher.pdf
Model fit: training points
           Underfitting                      Overfitting                    Might be just right




    This model has too simplistic   The model effectively memorizes   The model finds a general pattern of
    assumptions about the data          the training data points         the data generating process
Model fit: test points
           Underfitting                      Overfitting                     Might be just right




   The model’s error remains high   The model has a much higher        The general pattern remains true on
     for both train and test sets   loss on the test set vs training           the unseen data
Train and test loss
          Underfitting                        Overfitting                        Might be just right




   Both train and test errors are   In this scenario, train loss is very      The model strikes a balance
             quite high               low while the test loss is high      between underfitting and overfitting
Bias and variance decomposition
                         • Techniques like bootstrapping are commonly used for
                           decomposing bias and variance by fitting models on
                           subsets on data to derive bias and variance
                         • We can see that the overfitting model has the highest
                           variance
 Bias and variance for classification problems1
                     Gradient Boosted Trees                                              Random Forest




                 With Boosted Trees, a shallow depth                          With Random Forest, we need a larger
                around 1 or 2 is optimal for this dataset                          depth to find a good balance


1. For classification problems, there’s no universally accepted method for decomposing bias and variance. Here, we use bootstrapping to
   visualize train and test losses, helping to identify the optimal individual tree depth for tree-based models. Link
 Unbiased estimators
In statistics, bias is understood as accuracy and
variance as precision of an estimate, and no trade-
off can be made for unbiased estimators1

In particular, bias is the distance between the
average of the collection of estimates and the true
average value of the parameter being estimated

For an unbiased estimator, the bias is equal to 0,
hence the error is typically composed only of the
variance component2

To the right, we show how with an increasing
sample size, the score function (gradient) approaches
the true Maximum Likelihood Estimate (MLE)

1. Lauritzen S. Properties of Estimators. https://www.stats.ox.ac.uk/~steffen/teaching/bs2siMT04/si2c.pdf
2. Meyer D. A Few Notes on Fisher Information. https://davidmeyer.github.io/ml/fisher.pdf
Notebook


           Notebook with the code available here ⤵
Extras (not mine)
Extras (not mine)
Extras (not mine)
Extras (not mine)
