Model Distillation with SHAP Values
Model Distillation with SHAP Values
From Black Box to Glass Box

                                   THE BLACK BOX                                                           SHAP (SHapley Additive exPlanations) values allow
                y                                                               X                          us to decompose predictions of white-box and
                                      (Teacher)
                                                                                                           black-box machine learning (ML) models into
                                     decision trees                                                        additive scores that explain the outcome.
                                      neural nets
                                                                                                           For more complex ML models, SHAP values
                                                                                                           leverage interactions between features, allowing us
                                                                                                           to represent complex relationships in a human-
                      SHAP values                                                                          understandable form.
                                    +1.42
                                                                                                           Knowing the SHAP values of model predictions
              +0.97                                                                                        allows us to perform distillation: building a simpler
                                                                                                           model (the student) that approximates the teacher’s
              -0.79                                                                                        predictive behavior.

                           -0.38                                                                           This deck explores two approaches1:
                                    +0.19
                                                                                                                 •   A Linear model with binning;
                                                                                                                 •   A Generalized Additive Model (GAM).
                                +0.02                                 GLASS BOX
                  -0.01
                                                                       (Student)                           The new glass box model can be used for inference
                                                                                                           without requiring the original black box model.

1. These materials will become part of a chapter dedicated to SHAP values in Credit Risk, along with SHAP scorecards and other practical applications.
  Model Distillation with SHAP Values
  Approach 1: Binned SHAP Values with Logistic Regression

                                                      With this approach, we bin raw features and replace
                                                      each bin with its average SHAP contribution.

                                                      This is conceptually similar to Weight of Evidence
                                                      (WOE) used in scorecards. Because SHAP values are
                                                      often expressed in log-odds units, this naturally
    Teacher Model                                     produces a scorecard-like model structure.
(Gradient-Boosted Tree)       SHAP Values
                                                      We can fit this pipeline as follows:

                                                      1. Train the Teacher model (e.g., Gradient-Boosted
                                                         Decision Tree algorithm).
       x1 … xi
                                                      2. Compute SHAP values on the training data.
                                                      3. Discretize features into bins and compute
                                                         average SHAP value for each bin
          𝜑! !"                                       4. Replace each feature with mapped average
                                                         SHAP value and optionally create interactions.
                                                      5. Train the Student model (Logistic Regression) on
                                                         the transformed features.
  Discretization and          Student Model           This pipeline distills a complex model into an
  SHAP Averaging           (Logistic Regression)      interpretable logistic regression scorecard using
                                                      SHAP values.
  Model Distillation with SHAP Values
  Approach 2: GAM Splines with Logistic Regression

                                                     With this approach, we fit a Generalized Additive
                                                     Model (GAM) for each feature so that each smooth
                                                     function 𝑔! 𝑥! approximates its SHAP contribution
                                                     𝜙"! . We then use these transformed features,
                                                     optionally expanded with pairwise interactions, as
                                                     inputs to a logistic regression model.
    Teacher Model
(Gradient-Boosted Tree)       SHAP Values            We can fit this pipeline as follows:

                                                     1. Train the Teacher model (e.g., Gradient-Boosted
                                                        Decision Tree algorithm).
                                                     2. Compute SHAP values on the training data.
                                                     3. Fit a GAM 𝑔! 𝑥! ≈ 𝜙"! for each feature.
                                                     4. Transform data using these GAM predictions and
                                                        create optional interaction terms.
                                                     5. Train the Student model (Logistic Regression) on
                                                        the transformed features.

                                                     This pipeline distills the nonlinear behavior of the
                                                     teacher model into a GAM-enhanced logistic
 Generalized Additive         Student Model          regression, preserving the teacher’s predictive power
 Model (GAM) Splines       (Logistic Regression)     while remaining interpretable.
Model Distillation with SHAP Values
Empirical Comparison of the Two Approaches


                                                          Our baseline is a CatBoost teacher trained
                                                          on a credit risk dataset achieving a Gini score
                                                          of around 0.896 on the test set.

                                                          When we distill it into a logistic regression
                                                          using binned SHAP values, we retain around
                                                          96%–97% of the teacher’s discriminatory
                                                          power.

                                                          SHAP-GAM distillation preserves almost all
                                                          of the teacher’s performance, achieving up
                                                          to 0.896 Gini, while keeping the model fully
                                                          transparent and deployable as a scorecard.

                                                          Both SHAP-binned and SHAP-GAM students
                                                          approximate the teacher’s performance quite
                                                          well, with GAM-based distillation achieving a
                                                          99.9% retention rate of the teacher’s
                                                          performance while remaining interpretable.



1. Notebook with experiments is available here: GitHub.
