activity_id: 7296422990588579840
source_url: https://www.linkedin.com/feed/update/urn:li:activity:7296422990588579840/
final_url: https://www.linkedin.com/feed/update/urn:li:activity:7296422990588579840/
title: Post | Feed | LinkedIn
authenticated_surface: True

0 notifications total Skip to search Skip to main content Keyboard shortcuts Close jump menu new feed updates notifications Home My Network Jobs Messaging Notifications Me For Business Reactivate Premium: 50% Off Carlos Vergara Lead Data Scientist | Cloud AI Solutions Architect Bogota, D.C., Capital District EPAM Systems Achieve 4x more profile visits Reactivate Premium: 50% Off Profile viewers 298 Post impressions 204 Feed detail update Feed post Andrija Djurovic Andrija Djurovic • 1st Premium • 1st Risk Advisory Risk Advisory 1yr • 1 year ago • Visible to anyone on or off LinkedIn 𝐓𝐡𝐞 𝐈𝐧𝐬𝐭𝐚𝐛𝐢𝐥𝐢𝐭𝐲 𝐨𝐟 𝐖𝐨𝐄 𝐄𝐧𝐜𝐨𝐝𝐢𝐧𝐠 𝐢𝐧 𝐏𝐃 𝐌𝐨𝐝𝐞𝐥𝐢𝐧𝐠 Binomial logistic regression with categorized risk factors is the most common approach for modeling Probability of Default (PD). Within this framework, dummy encoding and Weights of Evidence (WoE) encoding are standard choices for handling categorical variables. While practitioners debate which method to use - or whether to combine both - the discussion usually revolves around trade-offs between degrees of freedom, explainability, and accuracy. Alan Forrest and I took a different perspective: we explored factor encoding as a potential source of model instability by testing the replicability of a model built on perfect outcome data. Check out our new presentation, which highlights key insights and raises points for further discussion. hashtag #modelrisk hashtag #modelriskmanagement hashtag #irb hashtag #pd hashtag #woe Your document has finished loading 203 20 comments 14 reposts Reactions … Like Comment Repost Send Add a comment… Open Emoji Keyboard Current selected sort order is Most relevant Most relevant Andrija Djurovic Author Risk Advisory 1y More on model risk management and credit risk modeling can be found here: https://github.com/andrija-djurovic/adsfcr GitHub - andrija-djurovic/adsfcr: Applied Data Science for Credit Risk Applied Data Science for Credit Risk. Contribute to andrija-djurovic/adsfcr development by creating an account on GitHub. Like 4 Reply Alexandru Din • 2nd Quant in Credit Risk at Deloitte 1y Very interesting research. Maybe the key is that you are using an aggregate or average measure of how many events occur in that bin, compared to non-events. If you switch from using actual outcomes to using the model’s predicted outcomes, changing which records count as events in each bin, this entire ratio can shift. Like 1 Reply 5 replies 5 Replies on Alexandru Din’s comment Andrija Djurovic Author Risk Advisory 1y We used model predictions in each iteration. See, for instance, the graphs on slides 6 and 7. Like 1 Reply Alexandru Din • 2nd Quant in Credit Risk at Deloitte 1y Andrija Djurovic the differences in WoE estimates when refitting on the PD predicted from the model based on WoE may have to do with WoE not directly linear in the PD as WOE is linearly related to the log odds. Like Reply Alan Forrest • 2nd Model Risk Professional 1y Alexandru-Costin Din Also to point out that this phenomenon appears even where binning is not an issue. Eg with a 3 level categorical factor, woe encoding is found to be unstable. The key to the phenomenon is the pre-processing to reduce degrees of freedom: even the simplest and most natural approach is unstable. Like 1 Reply Alexandru Din • 2nd Quant in Credit Risk at Deloitte 1y Alan Forrest I understand your point and find the research insightful. I would just dare to disagree on the rationale if I may. While it's true that WoE encoding reduces the degrees of freedom when comparing to dummy one-hot encoding, the instability in refitting is not caused by having fewer degrees of freedom but by the iterative recalculation of WoE from newly predicted outcomes, a WoE which is not linear with the predicted PD. …more Like Reply Alan Forrest • 2nd Model Risk Professional 1y Alexandru-Costin Din I agree indeed nonlinearity contributes to this phenomenon. But I do think degree of freedom is crucial; when you apply a dummy variable approach (no loss of df) this instability does not occur. Like 1 Reply Collapse replies Anton Treialt • 1st Risk Management | Leveraging AI 1y Having less precise model is kind of obvious compared to dummy encoding, because the weights of bins are fixed during multivariate analysis and cannot be optimised. In her book Credit Scoring book Elizabeth Mays places "binning variables based on their bivariate relationship to the outcome variable" into ten mistakes to avoid. My intuition is that if we would be able to quantify all sources of model risk for a given model then the contribution of WoE encoding (assuming sufficient granularity, that you have found the behaviour of individual bins acceptable, etc.) would be marginal compared to the rest. That said some people recode the WoE bins during multivariate analysis to avoid this issue. In the past I have tested both approaches a few times and found no difference in out-of-time results. …more Like 1 Reply 1 reply 1 Comment on Anton Treialt’s comment Andrija Djurovic Author Risk Advisory 1y Anton Treialt I don’t think the phenomenon we presented is related to optimizing the binning process as long as WoE is calculated based on the observed target. Even if we optimize binning within a multivariate analysis, the model won’t replicate in a perfect outcome. Like 1 Reply Alexey Gavrilyuk • 1st Credit Risk Manager | 15+ years in banking | Driving Banking Resilience | PD, LGD, EAD | Basel IV & IFRS 9 | Data-Driven Risk Strategy 1y Alan Forrest, Andrija Djurovic Thank you for the interesting research. A small question. On the fourth slide you show 2 tables with WOE values ​​that are different. At the same time, the bin boundaries are the same. If you use the same data sets (the number of good and bad is the same), then you should have the same WOE values. Could you write how you calculated WOE on slide 4? …more Like 1 Reply 1 reply 1 Comment on Alexey Gavrilyuk’s comment Alan Forrest • 2nd Model Risk Professional 1y Alexey Gavrilyuk many thanks for your note which pins down the critical point. The second model is not built on the same dataset as the first; it is built on the dataset predicted by the first model. To emphasise again- this is not about binning, but about having to build a replacement model even if the first model predicts perfectly. …more Like 1 Reply Alan Forrest • 2nd Model Risk Professional (edited) 1y Andrija Djurovic many thanks again for our enjoyable collaboration on a technical and interesting topic. First time readers - be alert. This is not about the accuracy of woe under data drift or other obvious points about the trade off between degrees of freedom and accuracy. It is about seeing your predictions come perfectly true but your model needs to be changed. If this comment means you read our presentation a second time then it has done its job. …more Like 3 Reply Jakob Lavröd • 2nd Senior Quantitative Risk Analyst at Handelsbanken - Quantifying whatever risks tomorrow will bring 1y Thank you for the interesting material. I struggle somewhat to understand why the WoE changes when predicting new data. The way I am used to use the WoE transform is that it is fixed by the training data, so it does not change when doing predictions. Or do I misunderstand something? In general, some of the WoE instability can be alleviated by using an ensamble model instead which replaces the WoE discrete values with a continuous curve as the result of training multiple models on the same data, which also then stabilizes the outcome somewhat. …more Like 1 Reply 2 replies 2 Replies on Jakob Lavröd’s comment See previous replies Alan Forrest • 2nd Model Risk Professional 1y Jakob Lavröd also to add about ensembles. Yes I think this phenomenon would be softened by averaging out small variations in model design. Interestingly, the example can be iterated (use the second model's prediction to fit a third model etc) and that iteration sequence will converge (KL metric) to a model that is stable under woe method. Perhaps that limit should be the preferred model? …more Like Reply Evgenij Zavodnik • 2nd Retired banker, risk analyst, Ph.D. 1y Very informative Like 1 Reply Helen McNab • 2nd Principal ScorePlus 1y Very helpful Like 1 Reply Mariyan Matakiev • 2nd Head of Analytics CEE at Experian 1y I find these results quite logical given the fact that through WoE you force the univariate relationship of LN GB odds to points assigned while dummy variables approach lets the model optimize coefficients in the multivariable set up. With WoE you force more intervals/ variables into the model at the expense of accuracy, in the dummy approach you are accurate in your prediction for dummy =1 segments that enter the model but you are still not accurate for the ones that don't enter the model. I find usefulness in WoE where you want to get to a model quickly (e.g. you have many variables, you don't want to remove highly correlated before you build a model, you don't want to play with the classing, etc.) or you are struggling with granularity. Nevertheless dummy variables remains the more robust approach. …more Like 1 Reply J. Eleandro Custódio • 2nd Credit Risk | Collections | ex-McKinsey | MSc. in AI/NLP @ USP | Data Science 1y Woe can be stable if you pick up/ stable categories in the training set. Second the woe might not be stable because the true effect what not captured. Eg. The model is using ranges of age but the volatility is coming from occupation, which was not included. It included it would capture the effect. Like 1 Reply 1 reply 1 Comment on J. Eleandro Custódio’s comment Alan Forrest • 2nd Model Risk Professional 1y J. Eleandro Custódio Thank you for your note and points about categorisation / binning and about specification errors. In fact this phenomenon happens even if the you have stable categories. It can happen even in the simplest case of 3 level categories encoded as woe. It is not really about binning, although the examples in the presentation explore that dimension. And your second point is good. The instability is strengthened when the model fails to pick up significant interactions or has other specification gaps. As such specification weakness is almost always present in practice, the woe instability remains a general problem. …more Like 1 Reply About Accessibility Help Center Privacy & Terms Ad Choices Advertising Business Services Get the LinkedIn app More LinkedIn Corporation © 2026 Status is online Messaging You are on the messaging overlay. Press enter to open the list of conversations. Compose message You are on the messaging overlay. Press enter to open the list of conversations.
