activity_id: 7335971743859105792
source_url: https://www.linkedin.com/feed/update/urn:li:activity:7335971743859105792/
final_url: https://www.linkedin.com/feed/update/urn:li:activity:7335971743859105792/
title: Post | Feed | LinkedIn
authenticated_surface: True

0 notifications total Skip to search Skip to main content Keyboard shortcuts Close jump menu new feed updates notifications Home My Network Jobs Messaging Notifications Me For Business Reactivate Premium: 50% Off Carlos Vergara Lead Data Scientist | Cloud AI Solutions Architect Bogota, D.C., Capital District EPAM Systems Achieve 4x more profile visits Reactivate Premium: 50% Off Profile viewers 298 Post impressions 205 Feed detail update Feed post Sune Skadegaard Thorsen Sune Skadegaard Thorsen • 2nd 2nd Founder and CEO, GLOBAL CSR and SEE impacts Founder and CEO, GLOBAL CSR and SEE impacts 11mo • 11 months ago • Visible to anyone on or off LinkedIn Follow hashtag #UNGPs hashtag #CSRD hashtag #CSDDD hashtag #OECDG hashtag #Omnibus With clear expectations to companies that the bank invests in, the Norwegian Bank is pointing the direction for the needed development in ESG/corporate sustainability - and a just transition. They bank requires: 1. Clear board-level responsibility for sustainability. 2. Science-based targets for both climate and nature. 3. Human rights due diligence aligned with UNGP and OECD. 4. Transparent, forward-looking reporting aligned with hashtag #ESRS, hashtag #GRI, or hashtag #TCFD. From our perspective the Bank is not killing, but merely supporting the expected outcome of the Omnibus. Of course a strong focus on climate change mitigation, which is pertinent in this stage of the evolving climate crisis. And next to this - back to basics - implementing human rights due diligence in alignment with the UNGPs (the OECDG merely replicated the UNGPs). This is and was the foundation for both CSRD and CSDDD - but the focus was obfuscated by the vast number of topical standards and repetitive data-points. "1. Clear board-level responsibility for sustainability" and "3. Human rights due diligence aligned with UNGP and OECD" - are both basic requirements from the UNGPs. - Well done NBIM. If in doubt about, what human rights due diligence looks like - take a look at our Primer - https://lnkd.in/dbeTZfMQ Adam Bergsveen Adam Bergsveen • 3rd+ Verified • 3rd+ Senior Advisor Sustainable Business and Team Manager, at Goodpoint - Part of Knightec Group Senior Advisor Sustainable Business and Team Manager, at Goodpoint - Part of Knightec Group 11mo • Edited • 11 months ago • Edited • Visible to anyone on or off LinkedIn Follow Did Norges Bank kill the Omnibus? Not officially. But in practice, for most serious businesses, yes. While EU politicians debate dilution and exemptions to hashtag #CSRD and hashtag #CS3D through the hashtag #Omnibus proposal, Norges Bank Investment Management (NBIM) has raised its sustainability expectations for every company it invests in globally (link in comments). They are the world’s largest sovereign wealth fund and among the most influential shareholders globally. They manage over €1.5 trillion in assets and hold stakes in over 9,000 companies. When they set expectations, companies listen. And the market moves forward. They now require: 1. Clear board-level responsibility for sustainability. 2. Science-based targets for both climate and nature. 3. Human rights due diligence aligned with UNGP and OECD. 4. Transparent, forward-looking reporting aligned with hashtag #ESRS, hashtag #GRI, or hashtag #TCFD. NBIM’s expectations are, point for point, what the Omnibus proposal is trying to delay or weaken. And they’re not alone. The European Central Bank is also openly criticizing the Omnibus, warning that weakening CSRD risks undermining financial stability. So, here’s the reality. Even if the Omnibus passes, it has already been made largely irrelevant. In two years, even more so. Because the financial market is moving faster, and demanding more, than EU policymakers. Investor expectations take precedence over regulatory delays. And companies that want capital, clients, or credibility need to keep up. Norges Bank didn’t kill the Omnibus with a vote. They killed it with capital. Agree? Activate to view larger image, Activate to view larger image, 16 2 reposts Reactions +8 Like Comment Repost Send Add a comment… Open Emoji Keyboard About Accessibility Help Center Privacy & Terms Ad Choices Advertising Business Services Get the LinkedIn app More LinkedIn Corporation © 2026 Status is online Messaging You are on the messaging overlay. Press enter to open the list of conversations. Compose message You are on the messaging overlay. Press enter to open the list of conversations.
