activity_id: 7395439589500465153
source_url: https://www.linkedin.com/feed/update/urn:li:activity:7395439589500465153/
final_url: https://www.linkedin.com/feed/update/urn:li:activity:7395439589500465153/
title: Post | Feed | LinkedIn
authenticated_surface: True

0 notifications total Skip to search Skip to main content Keyboard shortcuts Close jump menu new feed updates notifications Home My Network Jobs Messaging Notifications Me For Business Reactivate Premium: 50% Off Carlos Vergara Lead Data Scientist | Cloud AI Solutions Architect Bogota, D.C., Capital District EPAM Systems Achieve 4x more profile visits Reactivate Premium: 50% Off Profile viewers 298 Post impressions 205 Feed detail update Feed post Jakob Lavröd Jakob Lavröd • 2nd Premium • 2nd Senior Quantitative Risk Analyst at Handelsbanken - Quantifying whatever risks tomorrow will bring Senior Quantitative Risk Analyst at Handelsbanken - Quantifying whatever risks tomorrow will bring 6mo • Edited • 6 months ago • Edited • Visible to anyone on or off LinkedIn Follow Is it possible to predict the FX rate movements? At yesterdays presentation at Sveriges riksbank, Anna Seim and Olav Syrstad argued that while it is essentially not possible to beat a random walk model for predictions forward in time, it is possible to build models that explain the historical movements in terms of macro economic variables. This might looks like a paradox, why could not the model be used for predictions? A potential answer lies in that the macro variables needed to compute the model in the backward scenario is available, while in a prediction scenario they also need to be predicted themselves. If prediction of the macro variables are as uncertain as the FX itself, the model would not really have anything to go on (as it can only relate two unknown things to each other). A version of this effect is debated in IRRBB as well. EBA heat maps tells us that we should include (among many other things) macro variables in the behavioral models. Yet while a baseline forecast might be available for the macro variables, we have no information about how they respond to one of the Basel shocks with the exception of interest rates or inflations which can be assumed to have a strong relationship. As such, while it looks tempting to include all variables predictive in a retrospective study, the FX case teach us that it might not help forward prediction or risk management. Would love to hear reflections or thought on FX prediction, have you seen predictive models beating random walk? hashtag #fx hashtag #fxrisk hashtag #irrbb hashtag #predictivemodel hashtag #randomwalk Activate to view larger image, Activate to view larger image, 86 9 comments 3 reposts Reactions +78 Like Comment Repost Send Add a comment… Open Emoji Keyboard Current selected sort order is Most relevant Most relevant Bul Ekici • 3rd+ Independent Macro & Markets Strategist | Former Central Bank Economist | FX & Fixed Income Analyst 6mo Engel Wu frameworks (and similar ones, used in one of the Riksbank seminar background papers) are excellent models for risk management, where the aim is to quantify currency exposure over a 1–5 year horizon, not to beat the random walk on a one month horizon for trading. Like 8 Reply 3 replies 3 Replies on Bul Ekici’s comment Jakob Lavröd Author Senior Quantitative Risk Analyst at Handelsbanken - Quantifying whatever risks tomorrow will bring 6mo Bul Ekici Thank you for your comment. The Engel Wu model was commented during the presentation that is allow retrospective explanation but no forward predictive power, and then by extension cannot be used from a risk management purpose (which per definition is forward looking). Have you seen Engel Wu being used successfully for out of time prediction or do you have some reference you can recommend here? …more Like Reply Bul Ekici • 3rd+ Independent Macro & Markets Strategist | Former Central Bank Economist | FX & Fixed Income Analyst 6mo Thank you Jakob, you raise a valid point. There are, however, several studies (including Engel & Wu’s own paper and more recent work by Chen & Chou 2023) that show models augmented with liquidity yields are not purely retrospective: they can deliver some out-of-sample predictive power, particularly over multi-quarter horizons. That said, the caveats matter. The predictability is not stable across currencies or time periods, and the framework is far better suited for risk-exposure quantification over 1–5 years than for short-term directional forecasting. In a risk-management setting, I find its real value is in the structural decomposition and scenario analysis it enables (interest-rate differentials plus liquidity/risk premia), rather than in trying to beat a random walk from month to month. Thanks again, great discussion. …more Like 2 Reply Jakob Lavröd Author Senior Quantitative Risk Analyst at Handelsbanken - Quantifying whatever risks tomorrow will bring 6mo Interesting, thank you for your insights here. Alot of good leads to start from to learn more. Like 1 Reply Collapse replies Jens Lieutenant Amin • 2nd Director @Deloitte | IFRS9 | IRB | Risk | Capital | 6mo Interesting thoughts, Jakob. I think some evidencing could be vetted within a Co-integrated VAR framework model. Maybe not so much a thing for forecasting prediction, but rather to understand macro causalities between the real economy and FX. Like 2 Reply 1 reply 1 Comment on Jens Lieutenant Amin’s comment Jakob Lavröd Author Senior Quantitative Risk Analyst at Handelsbanken - Quantifying whatever risks tomorrow will bring 6mo Jens Lieutenant Amin Thank you for the comment. Interesting as you say to make a distinction between understanding macro causality and prediction. Riskbankens point was that they have models that work retrospectively just as you write to learn about macro drivers, but that it will not really help with forecasts. Like 1 Reply Jonathan Schachter, Ph.D. • 2nd Quant | Wall Street financial engineer: model governance | model validation | counterparty credit risk | climate risk | market risk | op risk | derivatives | structured products | asset management | crypto | AI | ML 6mo Predicting spot fx might be tough. I recommend modeling the futures. Like 3 Reply 2 replies 2 Replies on Jonathan Schachter, Ph.D.’s comment See previous replies Jonathan Schachter, Ph.D. • 2nd Quant | Wall Street financial engineer: model governance | model validation | counterparty credit risk | climate risk | market risk | op risk | derivatives | structured products | asset management | crypto | AI | ML 6mo Jakob Lavröd I will reach out, but generally spot commodity markets are very indiosyncratic. Like 1 Reply About Accessibility Help Center Privacy & Terms Ad Choices Advertising Business Services Get the LinkedIn app More LinkedIn Corporation © 2026 Status is online Messaging You are on the messaging overlay. Press enter to open the list of conversations. Compose message You are on the messaging overlay. Press enter to open the list of conversations.
