activity_id: 7435946096050339840
source_url: https://www.linkedin.com/feed/update/urn:li:activity:7435946096050339840/
final_url: https://www.linkedin.com/feed/update/urn:li:activity:7435946096050339840/
title: (4) Post | Feed | LinkedIn
authenticated_surface: True

0 notifications total Skip to search Skip to main content Keyboard shortcuts Close jump menu new feed updates notifications Home My Network Jobs Messaging 4 4 new notifications Notifications Me For Business Reactivate Premium: 50% Off Carlos Vergara Lead Data Scientist | Cloud AI Solutions Architect Bogota, D.C., Capital District EPAM Systems Achieve 4x more profile visits Reactivate Premium: 50% Off Profile viewers 298 Post impressions 204 Feed detail update Feed post Andrija Djurovic Andrija Djurovic • 1st Premium • 1st Risk Advisory Risk Advisory 2mo • 2 months ago • Visible to anyone on or off LinkedIn 𝗔 𝗠𝗼𝗱𝗲𝗹-𝗕𝗮𝘀𝗲𝗱 𝗔𝗽𝗽𝗿𝗼𝗮𝗰𝗵 𝘁𝗼 𝗗𝗶𝘀𝗰𝗿𝗲𝘁𝗲 𝗣𝗗 𝗥𝗮𝘁𝗶𝗻𝗴 𝗦𝗰𝗮𝗹𝗲 𝗖𝗮𝗹𝗶𝗯𝗿𝗮𝘁𝗶𝗼𝗻 - 𝗟𝗼𝗴𝗶𝘀𝘁𝗶𝗰 𝗥𝗲𝗴𝗿𝗲𝘀𝘀𝗶𝗼𝗻 𝗜𝗻𝘁𝗲𝗿𝗰𝗲𝗽𝘁 𝗢𝗽𝘁𝗶𝗺𝗶𝘇𝗮𝘁𝗶𝗼𝗻 In IRB modeling, risk quantification is a regulatory requirement aimed at assigning an appropriate level of risk to the model output. This process includes several steps, from assigning the so-called best or base estimate to ultimately adding a certain level of conservatism. For the most common PD model design, where the final model output is a rating scale, assigning the best estimate refers to the calculation of long-run average default rates over the full calibration sample. As a prerequisite for this process, practitioners must be able to assign a rating grade to all relevant observations in the calibration sample. By calculating best estimates as long-run averages of default rates per rating grade, practitioners lose the link between the model scores (the initial model output) and the final estimates. Maintaining this link between the initial model output and the calibrated best estimates can be beneficial, as it provides a critical input for further analyses of model structure quality. In particular, it can serve as a key input for homogeneity testing, which in IRB modeling is likely the least quantitatively developed aspect of model validation. My latest presentation introduced a model-based approach to discrete PD rating scale calibration based on optimizing the intercept in a logistic regression. The presented method is one of the approaches that aligns with the most commonly used approach for calibrating a PD rating scale based on calibration segment default rates, and it was therefore selected as the first method in my work dedicated to this topic. As this is only one of several possible approaches to model-based calibration, I encourage practitioners to consider the advantages and disadvantages of different methods that can be used for the same purpose. hashtag #irb hashtag #pd hashtag #calibration hashtag #riskquantification hashtag #eba hashtag #ecb Your document has finished loading 135 Anton Treialt and 134 others 5 reposts Reactions … Like Comment Repost Send Add a comment… Open Emoji Keyboard About Accessibility Help Center Privacy & Terms Ad Choices Advertising Business Services Get the LinkedIn app More LinkedIn Corporation © 2026 Status is online Messaging You are on the messaging overlay. Press enter to open the list of conversations. Compose message You are on the messaging overlay. Press enter to open the list of conversations.
