activity_id: 7438173655291019265
source_url: https://www.linkedin.com/feed/update/urn:li:activity:7438173655291019265/
final_url: https://www.linkedin.com/feed/update/urn:li:activity:7438173655291019265/
title: Post | Feed | LinkedIn
authenticated_surface: True

0 notifications total Skip to search Skip to main content Keyboard shortcuts Close jump menu new feed updates notifications Home My Network Jobs Messaging Notifications Me For Business Reactivate Premium: 50% Off Carlos Vergara Lead Data Scientist | Cloud AI Solutions Architect Bogota, D.C., Capital District EPAM Systems Achieve 4x more profile visits Reactivate Premium: 50% Off Profile viewers 298 Post impressions 204 Feed detail update Feed post Regxplora - A Financial Regulatory & Central Bank Intelligence Platform Regxplora - A Financial Regulatory & Central Bank Intelligence Platform 920 followers 920 followers 2mo • 2 months ago • Visible to anyone on or off LinkedIn Follow Europe, Finansinspektionen: Sweden's Financial Supervisory Authority invites applications to join Innovationskompassen reference group on reliability of AI-based ESG data Sweden's Financial Supervisory Authority has opened a call for expressions of interest to participate in a reference group for its first Innovationskompassen guidance project, focused on the reliability of automated and AI-based methods used to produce ESG data. Following nine market submissions on potential guidance needs, the authority selected the ESG data reliability topic under its Innovationskompassen process for identifying and addressing areas where supervisory guidance may be needed. The work will map concrete questions and challenges around the use of such data, including in external sustainability reporting and firms’ approaches to calculating and managing sustainability risks, and will also consider how the authority can best provide guidance. Other submitted topics are to be retained for possible future iterations. Applications to join the reference group are due by 29 March, with participants to be selected based on relevance while aiming for a broad mix of competencies and perspectives. A series of workshops is planned for April to June 2026 once the reference group has been appointed. Link to official release: https://lnkd.in/dhthFEn5 Activate to view larger image, Activate to view larger image, 2 Reactions Like Comment Repost Send Add a comment… Open Emoji Keyboard Similar pages Energy Shift Institute Think Tanks 2-10 employees Follow International Renewable Energy Agency (IRENA) International Affairs 51-200 employees Stefania & 18 other connections follow this page Follow EMTA Non-profit Organization Management 2-10 employees Follow Show more About Accessibility Help Center Privacy & Terms Ad Choices Advertising Business Services Get the LinkedIn app More LinkedIn Corporation © 2026 Status is online Messaging You are on the messaging overlay. Press enter to open the list of conversations. Compose message You are on the messaging overlay. Press enter to open the list of conversations.
