activity_id: 7453691768476405760
source_url: https://www.linkedin.com/feed/update/urn:li:activity:7453691768476405760/
final_url: https://www.linkedin.com/feed/update/urn:li:activity:7453691768476405760/
title: Post | Feed | LinkedIn
authenticated_surface: True

0 notifications total Skip to search Skip to main content Keyboard shortcuts Close jump menu new feed updates notifications Home My Network Jobs Messaging Notifications Me For Business Reactivate Premium: 50% Off Carlos Vergara Lead Data Scientist | Cloud AI Solutions Architect Bogota, D.C., Capital District EPAM Systems Achieve 4x more profile visits Reactivate Premium: 50% Off Profile viewers 298 Post impressions 204 Feed detail update Feed post Andrija Djurovic Andrija Djurovic • 1st Premium • 1st Risk Advisory Risk Advisory 1mo • 1 month ago • Visible to anyone on or off LinkedIn 𝗕𝗮𝗰𝗸𝘁𝗲𝘀𝘁𝗶𝗻𝗴 𝗣𝗗 𝗠𝗼𝗱𝗲𝗹𝘀 - 𝗢𝗻 𝘁𝗵𝗲 𝗥𝗲𝗹𝗶𝗮𝗯𝗶𝗹𝗶𝘁𝘆 𝗼𝗳 𝘁𝗵𝗲 𝗠𝘂𝗹𝘁𝗶-𝗣𝗲𝗿𝗶𝗼𝗱 𝗡𝗼𝗿𝗺𝗮𝗹 𝗧𝗲𝘀𝘁 As risk quantification is a regulatory requirement in IRB modeling, practitioners pay significant attention to meeting these requirements. In addition, they must assess the appropriateness of model estimates - typically referred to as backtesting. In practice, PD backtesting is one of the most comprehensive validation exercises, usually examining model estimates across different portfolio subsegments and time dimensions. A commonly applied approach is to backtest PD estimates over a recent period, covering the latest three to five years. In some cases, this analysis is extended further back, but it still relies on a relatively limited number of observations. One method used to assess these estimates against observed default rates is the normal test. My latest presentation examines the reliability of the normal test given the relatively limited number of observations used for testing. More specifically, it analyzes the Type I error under three different data-generating processes for default rates, considering both independent and correlated observations over time, as well as deviations from normality. Since multi-period backtesting of PD models is a topic practitioners often struggle with - particularly when aligning it with the standard IRB calibration process - some of my future work will focus on this area. Specifically, I will propose an alternative method for multi-period averaging tests that fully aligns with the calibration process. hashtag #irb hashtag #pd hashtag #backtesting Your document has finished loading 172 Anton Treialt and 171 others 7 comments 13 reposts Reactions … Like Comment Repost Send Add a comment… Open Emoji Keyboard Current selected sort order is Most relevant Most relevant Sauran Sarbassov • 2nd Risk & Payments Data Scientist | Credit Risk (PD/LGD/EAD) | IFRS 9 | Transaction & Behavioral Data 1mo Very interesting — especially the impact of autocorrelation. In practice, this is exactly what makes PD validation tricky. We often assume independence when applying statistical tests, but default rates are clearly driven by common macro factors. So even if the PD is correctly calibrated, the test may reject it simply because the underlying assumptions are violated. This creates a real risk of misinterpreting validation results — especially with short time series. Curious if you’ve explored alternatives that are more robust to correlation? …more Like 4 Reply 4 replies 4 Replies on Sauran Sarbassov’s comment Andrija Djurovic Author Risk Advisory 1mo Sauran Sarbassov thanks for your comment. Yes, I have investigated some adjustments to account for correlation of defaults across reference dates. I plan to post about this together with the new multi-period average testing approach. It is indeed a very interesting topic. Practitioners often consider correlation over time mainly when running regressions in the context of PD modeling, but it is equally important in other areas, such as testing and MoC within the IRB framework. In essence, correlation affects the effective sample size and is therefore directly related to statistical testing as well. …more Like 1 Reply Sauran Sarbassov • 2nd Risk & Payments Data Scientist | Credit Risk (PD/LGD/EAD) | IFRS 9 | Transaction & Behavioral Data 1mo That’s a great point — especially on the effective sample size. It’s something that’s often overlooked in practice, but it really changes how we should interpret test results. Looking forward to your post on this. …more Like 1 Reply Nikola Perović, FRM • 2nd Quantitative Analyst. 4w Sauran Sarbassov Also see Order statistic test [Blümke] which incorporates the time-series of 1Y default rates at rating grade or portfolio level, into the evaluation. If the rank order of the most recent 1Y default rate is "low", more summation terms are added to the calculation. If the rank is "high", less summation terms are considered. The analogy is with that of driving a vehicle with automatic transmission - where depending on the terrain and target provided [to the tempomat], the engine has to overcompensate when driving uphill [to reach and maintain a certain speed level] and undercompensate on the downhill. Of course, other variations can be explored, with recursive logic for the RDS etc. Unfortunately, the original test still uses the usual 1-factor copula conditional PDs. One can replace those with custom conditional distributions based on empirical CDFs, for the calculation. Cheers. …more Like 1 Reply Sauran Sarbassov • 2nd Risk & Payments Data Scientist | Credit Risk (PD/LGD/EAD) | IFRS 9 | Transaction & Behavioral Data 4w Nikola Perović, FRM Thanks for sharing — very insightful. The idea of incorporating time dynamics is particularly interesting, especially given how sensitive these tests are to correlation and small sample effects. Using multiple periods seems helpful in stabilising the signal, though the dependence structure itself likely remains. I also find it quite interesting that tests like Blümke effectively rely on ranking (i.e. discrimination) to assess calibration — a subtle but powerful idea. Makes you wonder to what extent test rejections reflect true miscalibration versus dependence effects. Will definitely take a closer look. …more Like 1 Reply Collapse replies Jakob Lavröd • 2nd Senior Quantitative Risk Analyst at Handelsbanken - Quantifying whatever risks tomorrow will bring 1w Interesting! The phi parameter sets the autocorrelation. What is your thinking around how large it is typically in practice? Like 1 Reply 1 reply 1 Comment on Jakob Lavröd’s comment Andrija Djurovic Author Risk Advisory 1w Jakob Lavröd it depends on the data frequency used, but for yearly default rates, I would use/require 0.30 as the compulsory minimum first-order autocorrelation for every backtesting exercise. In this particular simulation, \phi is linked to the systemic factor, but it effectively represents correlated default rates. …more Like 1 Reply About Accessibility Help Center Privacy & Terms Ad Choices Advertising Business Services Get the LinkedIn app More LinkedIn Corporation © 2026 Status is online Messaging You are on the messaging overlay. Press enter to open the list of conversations. Compose message You are on the messaging overlay. Press enter to open the list of conversations.
