activity_id: 7458765378664427520
source_url: https://www.linkedin.com/feed/update/urn:li:activity:7458765378664427520/
final_url: https://www.linkedin.com/feed/update/urn:li:activity:7458765378664427520/
title: Post | Feed | LinkedIn
authenticated_surface: True

0 notifications total Skip to search Skip to main content Keyboard shortcuts Close jump menu new feed updates notifications Home My Network Jobs Messaging Notifications Me For Business Reactivate Premium: 50% Off Carlos Vergara Lead Data Scientist | Cloud AI Solutions Architect Bogota, D.C., Capital District EPAM Systems Achieve 4x more profile visits Reactivate Premium: 50% Off Profile viewers 298 Post impressions 204 Feed detail update Feed post Andrija Djurovic Andrija Djurovic • 1st Premium • 1st Risk Advisory Risk Advisory 2w • 2 weeks ago • Visible to anyone on or off LinkedIn 𝗥𝗶𝘀𝗸 𝗙𝗮𝗰𝘁𝗼𝗿 𝗘𝗻𝗴𝗶𝗻𝗲𝗲𝗿𝗶𝗻𝗴 𝗶𝗻 𝗣𝗗 𝗠𝗼𝗱𝗲𝗹𝘀 - 𝗧𝗿𝗲𝗲-𝗕𝗮𝘀𝗲𝗱 𝗜𝗻𝘁𝗲𝗿𝗮𝗰𝘁𝗶𝗼𝗻𝘀 Risk factor engineering is a critical step in every PD model development. In traditional frameworks using logistic regression, it is often equated with the binning of individual risk factors. With the increased use of machine learning (ML) in credit risk, practitioners are exploring additional ways to enhance the development of the risk differentiation function using alternative methods. One ML approach to risk factor engineering that goes beyond standard binning is tree-based interaction extraction. In essence, this method involves deriving new risk factors from decision tree models, which can then be used as inputs in logistic regression or even as challenger models. My latest presentation demonstrates a tailored approach to risk factor engineering based on decision tree models. Adjustments to standard decision tree algorithms refer to the incorporation of core binning principles typically considered in credit risk model development. As the presented method serves illustrative purposes only, practitioners are encouraged to consider additional adjustments to the proposed algorithm that best suit their use case. The same approach can be easily extended to LGD and EAD modeling, as well as to other designs, such as those using random forest. In the coming months, I plan to develop an R package to facilitate the use of such methods in credit risk model development. Your document has finished loading 141 Ozan Çağlar, Phd, CMA and 140 others 4 comments 11 reposts Reactions … Like Comment Repost Send Add a comment… Open Emoji Keyboard Current selected sort order is Most relevant Most relevant Andrija Djurovic Author Risk Advisory 2w Denis Burakov Luka Loncar you might find something interesting in this presentation, as we recently had a discussion on the same topic. Like 2 Reply Charlin DJIOKO • 2nd Quantitative Analyst & Data Scientist | Open to full-time opportunities 6d Great approach! One open question though: how do we select which features to feed into the tree? This got me thinking, what if we ran the tree on the working response residuals, using variables that showed some univariate signal but couldn't enter the final model? The tree would then capture what the model left unexplained. …more Like 1 Reply 1 reply 1 Comment on Charlin DJIOKO’s comment Andrija Djurovic Author Risk Advisory 6d Charlin DJIOKO thanks for your comment. I agree that the idea of using residuals is good. However, I find that approach somewhat tricky when it is necessary to control for the expected relationship (monotonicity), at least at the splitting node level. On the other hand, I use this approach for model validation purposes, with the aim of identifying segments where the PD model over- or underestimates the default rate, as well as for the possible identification of omitted risk factors. The same idea can be further developed by considering different types of residuals, for instance. If you are interested, you can check the segment.vld function from my PDtoolkit R package. https://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/PDtoolkit/PDtoolkit.pdf …more PDtoolkit: Collection of Tools for PD Rating Model Development and Validation Package ‘PDtoolkit’ May 7, 2026 Title Collection of Tools for PD Rating Model Development and Validation Version 1.2.0 Maintainer Andrija... Like 1 Reply Sauran Sarbassov • 2nd Risk & Payments Data Scientist | Credit Risk (PD/LGD/EAD) | IFRS 9 | Transaction & Behavioral Data 2w Completely agree with this approach. One of the biggest advantages of tree-based interaction extraction is that it helps uncover nonlinear risk structures that traditional scorecard development often misses unless interactions are manually engineered. I also like the idea of keeping the final model in a more interpretable logistic/WOE framework while using trees mainly as a risk factor engineering tool rather than a black-box replacement. To me, this is also a very good example of how ML techniques should actually be integrated into credit risk modeling: not as a full replacement of traditional frameworks, but as a structured enhancement layer that still preserves explainability, governance, monotonicity principles, and business interpretability. The monotonicity and minimum default constraints are especially important in real-world regulatory modeling environments. …more Like 1 Reply About Accessibility Help Center Privacy & Terms Ad Choices Advertising Business Services Get the LinkedIn app More LinkedIn Corporation © 2026 Status is online Messaging You are on the messaging overlay. Press enter to open the list of conversations. Compose message You are on the messaging overlay. Press enter to open the list of conversations.
