activity_id: 7461301929135022080
source_url: https://www.linkedin.com/feed/update/urn:li:activity:7461301929135022080/
final_url: https://www.linkedin.com/feed/update/urn:li:activity:7461301929135022080/
title: (4) Post | Feed | LinkedIn
authenticated_surface: True

0 notifications total Skip to search Skip to main content Keyboard shortcuts Close jump menu new feed updates notifications Home My Network Jobs Messaging 4 4 new notifications Notifications Me For Business Reactivate Premium: 50% Off Carlos Vergara Lead Data Scientist | Cloud AI Solutions Architect Bogota, D.C., Capital District EPAM Systems Achieve 4x more profile visits Reactivate Premium: 50% Off Profile viewers 298 Post impressions 204 Feed detail update Feed post Andrija Djurovic Andrija Djurovic • 1st Premium • 1st Risk Advisory Risk Advisory 1w • 1 week ago • Visible to anyone on or off LinkedIn 𝗕𝗮𝗰𝗸𝘁𝗲𝘀𝘁𝗶𝗻𝗴 𝗣𝗗 𝗠𝗼𝗱𝗲𝗹𝘀 - 𝗧𝗵𝗲 𝗠𝘂𝗹𝘁𝗶-𝗣𝗲𝗿𝗶𝗼𝗱 𝗔𝘃𝗲𝗿𝗮𝗴𝗲 𝗧𝗲𝘀𝘁𝗶𝗻𝗴 In the context of Probability of Default (PD) IRB modeling, backtesting is one of the most comprehensive exercises conducted across different stages of the modeling process. The primary purpose of backtesting is to ensure that model estimates accurately predict the occurrence of defaults, i.e., that PD estimates provide reliable forecasts of default rates. Given the nature of these estimates, average PDs are typically backtested over a recent period of three to five years across different subsegments using the z-score test. When preparing inputs for multi-period average testing, practitioners often overlook the fact that the estimated PD is calculated as an arithmetic mean of yearly default rates. Therefore, the preparation of inputs must ensure that the observed default rates are properly aligned with the estimated PDs. In my latest presentation, I compare two commonly used methods for preparing inputs for multi-period average testing with a method that fully aligns with the calibration process. As demonstrated by the simulation results, these approaches lead to different test outcomes. Moreover, only the approach that fully aligns with the calibration process is statistically valid. In some of my upcoming posts, I will compare the statistical validity of these different approaches, confirming the appropriateness of only the method proposed in this presentation. I will also demonstrate how the dependency structure can be incorporated into the testing procedure. Given that the only statistically valid approach is the one aligned with the PD calibration process, where long-run average default rates are calculated as arithmetic averages of yearly default rates, practitioners are encouraged to consider how this impacts other aspects of PD model validation involving the use of multi-period observations, particularly aspects related to model heterogeneity and homogeneity. hashtag #irb hashtag #pd hashtag #backtesting hashtag #zscoretest Your document has finished loading 82 Ozan Çağlar, Phd, CMA and 81 others 5 reposts Reactions +74 Like Comment Repost Send Add a comment… Open Emoji Keyboard About Accessibility Help Center Privacy & Terms Ad Choices Advertising Business Services Get the LinkedIn app More LinkedIn Corporation © 2026 Status is online Messaging You are on the messaging overlay. Press enter to open the list of conversations. Compose message You are on the messaging overlay. Press enter to open the list of conversations.
