Everything Is Predictable by Tom Chivers | Royal Society
Fellows
Back trigger
Fellows
The Royal Society is a self-governing Fellowship made up of many of the world’s most eminent scientists, engineers, and technologists.
Search the Fellows Directory
Search for Past Fellows
About elections
Biographical Memoirs
Events
Back trigger
Events
Discover events, scientific meetings and exhibitions held by the Royal Society, as well as access to videos of past events and information on our venue.
Public events
Scientific meetings
Accessibility
Summer Science Exhibition
Past event videos on YouTube
Venue hire
Journals
Back trigger
Journals
Discover new research from across the sciences in our international, high impact journals. Find out more about our values as a not-for-profit society publisher, our support for open science and our commitment to research integrity.
See all journals
Search the journals
Authors
Reviewers
Librarians
Open access
About our journals
Journal policies
Metrics
Current topics
Back trigger
Current topics
Find out about our work in areas of current topical interest to the Royal Society.
AI and data
Climate change and biodiversity
Education and skills
Equality, diversity and inclusion
Genetic technologies
Health
History of science
Innovation
New technologies
Research culture and funding
Grants
Back trigger
Grants
The Royal Society provides a range of grant schemes to support the UK scientific community and foster collaboration between UK based and overseas scientists.
Applying
See all grants
Application and assessment process
Application dates
Flexi-Grant login
Support
Training and development opportunities
Research Fellows Portal
Global Talent Visa
About Grants
Policies and positions
Contact the Grants team
Medals and prizes
Back trigger
Medals, awards and prizes
The Society’s medals, awards and prize lectures recognise excellence in science and technology. Our most prestigious award, the Copley Medal, was first awarded in 1731.
See all medals and prizes
Nomination guidance
Premier awards
Science Book Prize
Young People's Book Prize
About us
Menu back
Who we are
Mission
Charity
Strategy
Our staff
Diversity and inclusion
Our history
What we do
Collections
Advising policy makers
Public engagement
Schools engagement
Industry engagement
International activities
Recognising excellence
Supporting researchers
UK Young Academy
How we are governed
Committees and working groups
Council
Our funding
Our supporters
Trustees Report
Work for us
Our values
Vacancies
News and resources
Back trigger
News and resources
Explore the latest work from the Royal Society, from news stories and blog posts to policy statements and projects. You can also find resources for teachers and history of science researchers.
Blog
News
Projects
Reports and publications
Resources for schools
History of science resources
Explainers and introductions
Videos
Women in STEM
Mobile menu trigger
Search
Search
Sign in
/
Medals and awards
/
Royal Society Trivedi Science Book Prize
/
Books
Everything Is Predictable
Shortlist: 2024
Author: Tom Chivers
Published by:
Weidenfeld & Nicolson
Everything Is Predictable is shortlisted for the 2024 Royal Society Science Book Prize, supported by the Trivedi Family Foundation
About the book
Thomas Bayes was an eighteenth-century Presbyterian minister and amateur mathematician whose obscure life belied the profound impact of his work. Like most research into probability at the time, his theorem was mainly seen as relevant to games of chance, like dice and cards. But its implications soon became clear.
Bayes' theorem helps explain why highly accurate screening tests can lead to false positives, causing unnecessary anxiety for patients. A failure to account for it in court has put innocent people in jail. But its influence goes far beyond practical applications. A cornerstone of rational thought, Bayesian principles are used in modelling and forecasting. 'Superforecasters', a group of expert predictors who outperform C IA analysts, use a Bayesian approach. And many argue that Bayes' theorem is not just a useful tool, but a description of almost everything - that it is the underlying architecture of rationality, and of the human brain.
Fusing biography, razor-sharp science communication and intellectual history, Everything Is Predictable is a captivating tour of Bayes' theorem and its impact on modern life. From medical testing to artificial intelligence, Tom Chivers shows how a single compelling idea can have far-reaching consequences.
About the author
Tom Chivers is a science writer and author. He was given Royal Statistical Society 'Statistical Excellence in Journalism' awards in 2018 and 2020, and was declared the Science Writer of the Year by the Association of British Science Writers in 2021. His two previous books are The Rationalist's Guide to the Galaxy and How to Read Numbers (with David Chivers).
Tom Chivers
Other shortlisted books
A City on Mars
Kelly and Zach Weinersmith
2024 - Shortlist
Eve
Cat Bohannon
2024 - Shortlist
The Last of its Kind
Gísli Pálsson
2024 - Shortlist
Why We Die
Venki Ramakrishnan
2024 - Shortlist
Your Face Belongs to Us
Kashmir Hill
2024 - Shortlist
Email updates
We promote excellence in science so that, together, we can benefit humanity and tackle the biggest challenges of our time.
Email updates
Subscribe to our newsletters to be updated with the latest news on innovation, events, articles and reports.
First name *
Last name *
Email *
Next
Name
What subscription are you interested in receiving?
(Choose at least one subject)
What subscription are you interested in receiving?
Public Newsletter - Summer Science, events, videos and news
Scientists newsletter - Grants, scientific meetings, and journals
Librarians newsletter - News and features for librarians
I am happy to receive the selected communications by
email from the Royal Society, as set out in our privacy policy.
I understand I can unsubscribe at any time.
Review privacy policy
*
Submit
Back
The Royal Society is a Fellowship of many of the world's most eminent scientists and is the oldest scientific academy in continuous existence.
Useful links
Fellow login
E-lect
Careers
Flexi grant
Legal
Terms and conditions
Privacy policy
Use of Artificial Intelligence (AI)
Cookies Settings
Cookies
Modern Slavery Statement
Visit us
Contact us
How to find us
Venue hire
Visit the library
Follow us
© 2026 The Royal Society. All rights reserved. Registered charity number 207043
