Machine Learning in Internal Credit Risk Models




Challenges and opportunities of using ML techniques in regulated contexts
                                                   1   2   3   4   5
Contents

1. Regulatory Background
2. Machine Learning in the Context of IRB Models
3. Challenges
4. Opportunities
5. Outlook for the Future
  1. Regulatory Background                                                                          1
  EBA’s View on Machine Learning in IRB
                                                                    EBA on Machine Learning (ML) in the context of IRB
                                                                    (EBA/REP/2023/281):

                                                                    • Applicable for risk differentiation phase of IRB
                                                                      model development
                                                                    • Explainability of ML models remains an open
                                                                      challenge
                                                                    • Prudential governance around material model
                                                                      changes is unclear
                                                                    • Competency gaps exist when it comes to new
                                                                      modelling techniques

                                                                    Challenges related to validation of ML models have
                                                                    not been fully addressed in EBA’s validation
                                                                    handbook (EBA/REP/2023/292) as of today

1. https://www.eba.europa.eu/publications-and-media/press-releases/eba-publishes-follow-report-use-machine-learning-internal
2. https://www.eba.europa.eu/activities/single-rulebook/regulatory-activities/model-validation/supervisory-handbook-validation
  1. Regulatory Background                                                                             1
  Do we really need ML for IRB?
                                                                     Hillary J. Allen, professor a Professor of Law,
                                                                     published a strong piece1 as a follow up to the
                                                                     discussion paper by EBA (EBA/DP/2021/04)

                                                                     “Explainability doesn’t tell us much about how the
                                                                     model as a whole works or how it is likely to make
                                                                     decisions in an uncertain future—which is what
                                                                     regulators really need to know when assessing IRB
                                                                     models”, Allen writes

                                                                     The choice of using “black-box” machine learning
                                                                     for regulatory capital is not fully in line with the
                                                                     goals of financial stability, and the choice of
                                                                     complexity over explainability is not warranted



1. https://blogs.law.ox.ac.uk/business-law-blog/blog/2021/12/just-say-no-machine-learning-irb-models
  2. Machine Learning in the Context of IRB Models                                                                     2
  Accuracy and Explainability in ML
             Accuracy - Explainability “Trade-Off”                            Machine Learning (ML) models allow to gain
                                                                              benefits in model performance in scoring tasks by
                                                                              leveraging upon more flexible statistical modeling
                                                                              techniques

                                                                              Boosting algorithms, such as gradient boosted
                                                                              decision trees (GBDT) have proven to be the best
                                                                              algorithms for tabular data outperforming logistic
                                                                              regression, especially on non-linearly separable
                                                                              data

                                                                              Gradient boosted tree framework for classification
                                                                              is based on logistic regression and performs the
                                                                              same task1
         Source: Alexandre Duval, Paul Edwards


1. Friedman, J., T. Hastie, R. Tibshirani. Additive Logistic Regression: a Statistical View of Boosting. Annals of Statistics, 2000.
  2. Machine Learning in the Context of IRB Models                                                               2
  Why Trees Outperform Simpler Models?
      Gradient boosted decision trees (GBDT)                             Decision trees in gradient boosted decision tree
                                                                         (GBDT) models provide a flexibility that linear
                                                                         alternatives like logistic regression lack

                                                                         Each tree works with the errors of the previous
                                                                         iterations and updates its forecasts as more
                                                                         trees are added to the ensemble to increase
                                                                         accuracy

                                                                         The process is somewhat similar to the Weight
                                                                         of Evidence (WOE) technique used by retail
                                                                         credit risk modellers in that we are combining
                                                                         evidences from different sources, in this case
                                                                         from different decision trees1



1. Paul Edwards et al. Real AdaBoost: Boosting for Credit Scorecards and Similarity to WOE Logistic Regression. SAS Paper 1323-2017.
  2. Machine Learning in the Context of IRB Models                                                               2
  Understanding Gradient Boosting
                     Gradient boosting                                   The process of gradient boosting can be
                                                                         understood as the estimation not on parameter
                                                                         level (as modellers do with linear and logistic
                                                                         regression), but in the functional space

                                                                         Each tree’s prediction is added to the intercept
                                                                         (base score) cumulatively to produce a probability
                                                                         or a linear prediction

                                                                         For regulatory use, however, these models cannot
                                                                         be used as is. The way these models process
                                                                         categorical data in major libraries (XGBoost,
                                                                         LightGBM, CatBoost) requires a careful engineering
                                                                         of model constraints1



1. Monotonicity and interactions constraints to preserve the monotonicity with regards to the default rate (EBA/REP/2023/29).
  3. Opportunities                                                                                               2            3
  Key Improvement Areas for ML Use in IRB models

                                                                                                                             Only a
                                                            Key IRB model development
                                                                                                                             snapshot of
                                                                areas with ML value
                                                                                                                             potential
                                                                                                                             application
                                                                                                                             scenarios1



                           Data quality and
                                                                Risk differentiation                   Risk quantification
                         representativeness


                   • Leverage generative                  • Train highly performant             • Use ML-driven scenario
                     adversarial networks (GANs)            tree-based risk models for            analysis to predict risk
                     to create high-quality                 better risk differentiation           under various economic
                     synthetic data                       • Integrate explainability              conditions
                   • Employ data augmentation               techniques to ensure that           • Continuously calibrate
                     techniques to mitigate bias            ML risk models are                    models using conformal
                     and prevent overfitting                interpretable and                     prediction techniques to
                                                            transparent                           maintain accuracy over time


1. Use cases are selected based on a personal opinion and conversations with adopters and providers in Financial Services.
  4. Challenges                                                                           1   3   4   5
  The Explainability (“Black-Box”) Problem1

             Focus of statistical
                 modeling




              Focus of machine
                  learning




1. Breiman, Leo. Statistical Modeling: The Two Cultures. Statist. Science, August 2001.
4. Challenges                                        1              3      4         5
Explainability as a Regulatory Constraint?
                              The EU AI Act in conjunction with GDPR create a
                              regulatory framework for explainability guardrails
                              when it comes to machine learning (ML) models

                              To comply, organizations must implement
                              measures to make their models explainable,
                              especially for high-risk cases (e.g., credit). This
                              involves techniques such as feature importance
                              and error analysis, post-hoc explanation methods
                              to provide insights into how decisions are made

                              By adhering to these explainability requirements,
                              organizations not only meet regulatory standards
                              but also enhance the overall reliability and ethical
                              standards of their AI systems
  5. Outlook for the Future                            5
  Changing Model Landscapes1



                      Next step for IRB models?




1. Author: Fabiana Clemente. Footnote by the author.
  5. Outlook for the Future                                                                                                                         5
  Towards the Adoption of ML in the Financial Services
    • The adoption of Machine Learning (ML) in the area of Financial Services (FS) will
      continue, and FS may be the most impacted industry1

    • As more Financial Services players adopt cloud technology, ML will play an ever-
      growing role in the provision of real-time analytical services to customers

    • For institutions with large retail portfolios, IRB models will likely be updated with
      newer algorithms, especially due to their ability to include more data sources and
      product segments into one model and process interactions natively

    • Regulatory understanding of technological trends and compliance assessments will
      remain key to the continuous advancements in this area in the EU

       ML solutions will provide more accurate risk assessments, helping institutions
       mitigate potential financial losses, but will require more human-in-the loop controls

1. Financial Services Skills Commission. Bridging the Skills Gap in a Rapidly Evolving Sector - Skills for the Future of Financial Services 2024.
           5




Appendix
Discussion paper on machine learning for IRB models

Public hearing – 16 December 2021
Digital age supervisory challenges from AI/ML

           Exponential      The EBA work identifies the supervisory challenges to adapt to
         increase in data   the technological developments and provides related guidance:
         availability and
         storing capacity    Jan 2020, EBA report on the recent trends of big data &
                              advanced analytics (BD&AA) in the banking sector.

                             April 2021, Commission legislative proposal on AI AI used
   Improvements
    in computing              for evaluating the creditworthiness of natural persons among
        power                 the high-risk use cases.

                             June 2021, EBA report analysing the current RegTech
           Emergence of       landscape in EU.
           Big Data and
           use of AI/ML
          technologies in    11 Nov 2021, EBA published the Discussion paper on ML for
            new context       IRB model (DP) for 3 months consultation.

                                                                                          2
Background
•   Why we need this discussion paper?




                                                Gap
                 Limited use for                       Increase in use of ML
                Regulatory capital                     for Internal purposes
                  IRB models         Use test Art 144(1)(b) CRR ?
                  for credit risk


•   What is the aim?
     Investigate the sources of this gap and
     discuss how ML models can coexist and adhere to the CRR requirements for IRB models for credit risk
•   Scope/definition: more complex ML models that are difficult to interpret
•   Why stakeholder feedback is important? Strengthening supervisory experience on ML models used in IRB
                                                                                                            3
Structure of the discussion paper

            • Set the scope (complex models)
Section2    • Current use

                                                           Each section
            • Challenges and potential benefits of using   has a set of
              ML in developing CRR compliant IRB Models      practical
Section 3                                                   questions


            • Main concerns
Section 4   • Principle-based recommendations


                                                                          4
Setting the scope
                                                                           High
•   ML covers a wide range of models with                               number of
                                                                        parameters
    different level of complexity (from linear
    regression to deep neural network)
•   The discussion paper refers only to the      Capacity to                                  Capacity to
                                                 extract info                                 reflect non-
    more complex that are difficult to
                                                                 Complex
                                                 from large                                       linear
    interpret and justify to supervisors          datasets                                      relations

•   No clear-cut distinction between simple
    and complex models                                            models
•   The DP provides characteristics to
    consider to evaluate the complexity of a              Applicable                 Big Datasets
    model                                                     to                      need for a
                                                          unstructure                   robust
                                                            d data                    estimation

                                                                                                        5
    Main challenges and benefits from using ML in IRB
•    The DP analyses CRR provisions to identify challenges
     and benefits in using ML to develop IRB compliant
     models                                                     Benefits         Challenges
•    These are specific to the context in which ML may
     be used (e.g. risk differentiation or validation) and
     depends on whether ML does the prediction in full
     or it is used as a supporting tool (e.g. data cleansing)
•    Main concerns:
       1.   Interpretability of results

       2.   The governance with particular reference to
            ensuring adequate understanding by their
            users including management functions
       3.   The     difficulty    in     evaluating      the
            generalisation capacity of a the models                        CRR
                                                                                              6
 Principle-based recommendations
The DP stresses economic and supervisory principles that banks should consider when seeking
approval to apply ML for regulatory purposes, these are aimed at:
     Ensure that ML models are properly understood by their users (CRCU, validation unit and
      management functions)
     Avoid unnecessary complexity (excessive number of parameters and reliance on
      unstructured data) if not justified by a significant improvement in predictive power
     Ensure model can be interpreted and documented properly (assess statistical and
      economic relations of risk drivers with model predictions)
     Enhancing the understanding of assumptions and behaviour of the model on specific
      predictions when using human judgement in model development and application
      respectively.
     Justify and monitor frequent updates of a model
     Focus on validation which may require increased depth/frequency
                                                                                           7
Industry feedback is sought with a set of 17 questions

            • Explore current use of ML in IRB
   Q 1-2


         • Explore specific challenges related to internal user acceptance,
           human judgement, overfitting, frequency of model updates.
  Q 3-12 • Challenges in using ML for IRB models stemming from the AI act

            • Explore potential benefits of using ML in IRB and,
            • In particular, the use of ML for collateral valuation
  Q 13-14

          • Explore the use of explainability techniques and, the strategy to
            ensure understanding by the ML models users
  Q 15-17 • Investigate industry concerns around the recommendations given
                                                                                8
Conclusions and next steps

• ML models can provide added value in the IRB context provided that they ensure
  acceptable monitoring, validation and explainability of methodology and model outcomes.
• The need for competence in ML is becoming increasingly important.
• Decision to go forward with ML in IRB should be based on prudential terms but also
  considering other relevant aspects (e.g. Ethical or consumer protection considerations)
• The discussion paper seeks stakeholders’ feedback on many practical aspects related to
  the use of machine learning in the context of IRB (deadline 11 February 2022)
• Need to provide further guidance will be assessed based on the feedback received
• Potential developments related to relations with the Commission AI act


                                                                                        9
EUROPEAN BANKING AUTHORITY
Floors 24-27, 20 Av André Prothin, 92927 Paris La Défense
Tel: +33 1 86 52 7000
E-mail: info@eba.europa.eu
http://www.eba.europa.eu
